# THE CAMBRIDGE COMPANION TO 

THE WASTE LAND
T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land is often considered the most important poem written in English in the twentieth century. The poem dramatically shattered old patterns of form and style, proposed a new paradigm for poetry and poetic thought, demanded recognition from all literary quarters, and changed the ways in which it was possible to approach, read, and write poetry. The Waste Land helped define the literary and artistic period known as modernism. This Companion is the first dedicated to the work as a whole, offering thirteen new essays by an impressive group of international scholars on an extensive range of topics. Written in a style that is at once sophisticated and accessible, these fresh critical perspectives will serve as an invaluable guide for scholars, students, and general readers alike.

Gabrielle McIntire is Associate Professor in the Department of English at Queen's University, Canada. She is the author of Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T. S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (Cambridge University Press, 2008) and has published articles on T. S. Eliot, Virginia Woolf, Joseph Conrad, Nella Larsen, and James Joyce in journals and collections including Modern Fiction Studies, Modernism/modernity, Narrative, and Callaloo. Her poetry has also appeared internationally, and she sits on the editorial boards of Twentieth-Century Literature and T. S. Eliot Studies Annual.

A complete list of books in the series is at the back of this book.

Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CAMBRIDGE
COMPANION TO
THE WASTE LAND

Published online by Cambridge University Press

# THE CAMBRIDGE COMPANION TO THE WASTE LAND 

EDITED BY<br>GABRIELLE MCINTIRE<br>Queen's University, Canada

# CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY IOOI3-2473, USA
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University's mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107672574
(C) Cambridge University Press 2015

This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

First published 2015
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Cambridge Companion to the Waste Land / [edited by] Gabrielle McIntire, Queen's University, Canada.
pages cm. - (Cambridge companions to literature)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-I-I07-05067-9 (hardback) - ISBN 978-I-I07-67257-4 (paperback)
I. Eliot, T. S. (Thomas Stearns), 1888-1965. The Waste Land.
I. McIntire, Gabrielle, editor.

PS3509.L43W3635 2015
821'.912-dc23 2014047360
ISBN 978-I-I07-05067-9 Hardback
ISBN 978-I-I07-67257-4 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLS for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
