# CONTRIBUTORS 

RICHARD BADENHAUSEN is Professor and Kim T. Adamson Chair at Westminster College in Salt Lake City, where he also directs the honors program. He is the author of T. S. Eliot and the Art of Collaboration (2009) and is working on a book-length study entitled T. S. Eliot's Traumatic Texts.
jewel spears brooker, Professor Emerita, Eckerd College, has had visiting positions at Yale, Harvard, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and Merton College, Oxford. She has published nine books, including Mastery and Escape: T. S. Eliot and the Dialectic of Modernism (1994), and is the coeditor of two volumes of Eliot's Complete Prose (2014 and forthcoming).
david e. chinitz, Professor of English at Loyola University Chicago, is the author of T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (2003) and Which Sin to Bear? Authenticity and Compromise in Langston Hughes (2013). He is the editor of A Companion to T. S. Eliot (2009) and coeditor, with Gail McDonald, of A Companion to Modernist Poetry (2014). Currently he is coediting, with Ronald Schuchard, The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot, Volume 6: 1940-1946.
michael coyle is Professor of English at Colgate University. He is the founding President of the Modernist Studies Association and currently serves as President of the T. S. Eliot Society. His edited collections include Ezra Pound and African American Modernism (2001); Broadcasting Modernism, with Debra Rae Cohen (2009); and, with Steven Yao, Ezra Pound and Education (2012). He is also the author of Ezra Pound, Popular Genres, and the Discourse of Culture (1995), and he writes broadly on modernist literature and jazz.
anthony cuda is Associate Professor of English at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro. He is the author of The Passions of Modernism: Eliot, Yeats, Woolf, and Mann (2010) and the coeditor, with Ronald Schuchard, of The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition, Volume 2: The Perfect Critic, 1919-1926 (2014).

JULIA E. DANIEL is Assistant Professor of Modern American Poetry at West Virginia University. Her current book project, Building Nature: City Planning, Landscape Architecture, and Modern American Poetry, combines her interests in ecocriticism and urban studies. Her work has appeared in A Companion to Modernist Poetry, Modern Drama, and the Journal of the Midwest Modern Language Association.
lyndall GORDON studied American literature at Columbia University and is a Fellow of St. Hilda's College, Oxford. She is the author of two memoirs and six biographies, including The Imperfect Life of T. S. Eliot (1999, 2015) and Lives Like Loaded Guns: Emily Dickinson and Her Family's Feuds (2010).

MICHAEL LEVENSON is William B. Christian Professor of English at the University of Virginia and author of A Genealogy of Modernism (1984), Modernism and the Fate of Individuality (1990), The Spectacle of Intimacy (coauthored with Karen Chase, 2000), and Modernism (2011). He has also edited The Cambridge Companion to Modernism (2000, 2011).

Gabrielle MCintire is Associate Professor in the Department of English at Queen's University, Canada. She is the author of Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T. S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (2008), and she has published articles or chapters on T. S. Eliot, Virginia Woolf, Joseph Conrad, James Joyce, and Nella Larsen. Her poetry has also appeared internationally.

SPENCER MORRISON, a Killam Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Alberta, researches urban representation in late modernism. His work is published or forthcoming in ELH, American Literature, and Fueling Culture: Energy, History, Politics (2016).
rachel potter is Professor of Modern Literature at the University of East Anglia. She is the author of Modernism and Democracy: Literary Culture, 1900-1930 (2006); The Edinburgh Guide to Modernist Literature (2012); and Obscene Modernism: Literary Censorship and Experiment, 1900-1940 (2013). She has also coedited The Salt Companion to Mina Loy (2010) and Prudes on the Prowl: Fiction and Obscenity in England, 1850-Present Day (2013). She is currently starting a project on International P.E.N., writers, and free speech.
jean-michel rabaté, Professor of English and Comparative Literature at the University of Pennsylvania, is a cofounder and curator of Slought Foundation, an editor of the Journal of Modern Literature, and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has authored more than thirty books and collections on modernism, psychoanalysis, and philosophy - most recently Crimes of the Future (2014), An Introduction to Literature and Psychoanalysis (2014), and 1922: Literature, Culture, Politics (2014).

EVE SORUM is Associate Professor of English at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. She is the recipient of a 2013-14 Fulbright Fellowship and has published articles on World War I poetry and prose, T. S. Eliot, Thomas Hardy, W. H. Auden, Virginia Woolf, and Ford Madox Ford.

BARRY SPURR was appointed as Australia's first Professor of Poetry at the University of Sydney in 2011. His published research is focused on early modern poetry and on the Modernists. His recent study, Anglo-Catholic in Religion: T. S. Eliot and Christianity (2010), written at the request of Valerie Eliot, is the first full account of the subject.

Published online by Cambridge University Press
