# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I want to thank first of all my contributors, whose careful work and deep commitment to ongoing explorations of The Waste Land have been inspiring throughout the process of making this book. Each contributor has been a marvelous interlocutor, and I will always be grateful for their patience, good humor, exciting new perspectives, and meticulous attention to the details. Special thanks, too, to the contributors who went beyond the call of duty and provided important feedback on overall concepts or on other individual chapters - I appreciate your collegiality immensely. Great thanks, too, go to the anonymous readers of the proposal for this project whose insights helped shape and nuance the aims of the Companion long before the volume had come into existence. This Companion also owes an enormous debt to Ray Ryan at Cambridge University Press, whose wisdom, acumen, and sheer common sense are unfailing. Thank you, Ray - we could not have done any of this without you. Both Louis Gulino and Caitlin Gallagher at the Press have also been delightful in every exchange, and I am grateful for their good spirit and care with the manuscript. Patrick Moran gave a thorough final read-through of my own chapter on ecocritique in The Waste Land, and I want to acknowledge the extraordinary helpfulness of his commentary. A number of colleagues and friends also encouraged me through the incarnation of this Companion, either directly or indirectly. For their thoughtfulness, insights, and friendship, I want to mention especially Hortense Spillers, Molly Hite, Linda Hutcheon, Benjamin Hagen, Eduardo Cadava, Dominick LaCapra, John Whittier-Ferguson, Daniel Schwarz, Frances Dickey, Vincent Sherry, Patricia Rae, Edward Lobb, Marta Straznicky, Andrew Bingham, Adriana Hetram, Jodie Medd, Daniel Brayton, Antonia Losano, Greg Stork, Brian Bitar, Kelly Drukker, Claire Boudet, Craig Walker, Farah Cimafranca, Rahul Sapra, John Sutton, and Lee Zimmerman. Each of you gave your time, energy, wisdom, and support at important moments in the book's evolution, and I want to express much gratitude for your presence in my life personally as well as professionally.

My thanks, too, go to the Department of English at Queen's University for continuing to provide me with a place to feel at home intellectually and collegially. During the making of this Companion I had the good fortune of teaching a graduate and an undergraduate seminar devoted in large part to T. S. Eliot. Both groups were exceptional and I was touched by the passion and dedication among those students, some of whom were coming to Eliot for very nearly the first time. The poet and actor John Farrell recited Eliot's entire Four Quartets from memory at Queen's during the final stages of editing, and the event infused a new kind of visionary stimulus into the project of always learning how to reread Eliot. During the summer of 2014, my colleagues and students at the T. S. Eliot International Summer School at the University of London, who came from all over the world just for the love of Eliot, gave a final boost of energy and excitement. In London I want especially to thank Gail McDonald, Wim Van-Mierlo, and Christopher Adams for their gracious hospitality and for fostering such a rich intellectual environment. Jeffrey Dzogola helped me prepare the manuscript for submission, and I greatly appreciate his willingness to be another pair of eyes on the material. And through the project I had generous support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC), for which I am profoundly grateful. Finally, I could not have done any of this without the care and love of my family: Olivia, Matthias, Eliot, Céline, Madeleine, Isabelle, Thomas, Rebekah, Harley, Mary Carolyn, and little Clara, I thank you from the bottom of my heart - you mean the world to me.
