On September 26 Thomas Stearns Eliot is born to Henry Ware Eliot and Charlotte Champe Stearns Eliot in St. Louis, Missouri. He is the youngest by nine years of seven children, one of whom had died in infancy. In his adult years Eliot was especially close to his brother Henry, born in 1879.

Eliot enrolls at Smith Academy, St. Louis. His grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, had founded the academy in 1854 and was its first chancellor.

Eliot publishes several poems in the Smith Academy Record and graduates from high school. Moves to Massachusetts to attend Milton Academy, a prestigious preparatory school founded in 1798 .

Begins his first year at Harvard College, though does not initially excel academically. He studies broadly in the humanities, languages, and literatures, taking courses in the history of ancient art, philosophy, French, German, Greek, Latin, and English literatures.

His poem, "Song," appears in the Harvard Advocate. He continues to publish in the Advocate through his college years and takes up a position on the editorial board in 1909.

Graduates from Harvard with an A.B. and begins his M.A., again taking a wide range of courses, especially in English literature, philosophy, and art history. He studies with Irving Babbitt and George Santayana.

Creates a poetry notebook titled Inventions of the March Hare. Drafts portions of "Portrait of a Lady." In the fall he leaves for Paris to study at the Sorbonne, where he attends

lectures by Henri Bergson at the Collège de France and lives at 15I bis rue St. Jacques, near the Pantheon and the Sorbonne. He receives private language tutoring with Alain-Fournier and befriends Jean Verdenal.

Graduates from Harvard with his M.A. after another trip to Europe where he visits London, Munich, and Northern Italy. Eliot returns to Boston, commencing the doctoral program in philosophy at Harvard where he studies Indian philosophy and Sanskrit. He finishes his first major poems, including "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," "Portrait of a Lady," "Prelude" [sic], and "Rhapsody on a Windy Night."

Meets and begins a romantic relationship with Emily Hale. He is appointed assistant in philosophy at Harvard.

Reads F. H. Bradley's Appearance and Reality, which becomes the subject of his doctoral dissertation.

Meets Bertrand Russell, a visiting professor at Harvard. Travels to London, England, and then Marburg, Germany, en route to taking up a one-year fellowship at Merton College, Oxford. Germany declares war on Russia and invades Luxembourg and Belgium while Eliot is in Marburg; he only manages to reach England several weeks later. Within a week of his arrival in London, he meets Ezra Pound, who is deeply impressed with "Prufrock" and sends it to Poetry magazine.

Meets Vivien Haigh-Wood in April. Jean Verdenal is killed in the Dardanelles in May. Poetry publishes "Prufrock" in June, and in October "The Boston Evening Transcript," "Aunt Helen," and "Cousin Nancy" are also printed in Poetry. Eliot marries Vivien Haigh-Wood at the Hampstead Registry Office, London, on June 26. His father stops all financial support. Wyndham Lewis's Blast publishes "Preludes," and "Portrait of a Lady" appears in Others. Eliot travels to Massachusetts to visit his family and decides not to move back to Boston. Upon his return to England he takes up a teaching post at the High Wycombe Grammar School, established in 1550.

Takes up a teaching position at Highgate Junior School in London, founded in 1565 . Completes his doctoral thesis, which is accepted by Harvard, but with ocean passage delayed for several days he decides not to return to Boston for his oral

defense. Moves with Vivien to Crawford Mansions, London. Starts publishing reviews in The Monist and begins lecturing on French and English literature.

1917 Gives up teaching at the preparatory school level, though he continues lecturing. Takes up a position with the Colonial and Foreign Department of Lloyd's Bank, London. In April the United States enters the war; Eliot tries to enlist but is declined due to a congenital hernia. The Egoist Limited publishes his first volume of poetry, Prufrock and Other Observations. Eliot becomes assistant editor of The Egoist magazine.

1918 Eliot is still trying to enlist with the U.S. Navy against Vivien Eliot and Ezra Pound's wishes; despite Eliot's ill health the U.S. Military Service sends him an Order of Induction in November but he never sees service. He continues to lecture on Elizabethan literature in London.

1919 Eliot's father, Henry Ware Eliot, dies on January 7. Eliot is offered an assistant editorship at the Athenaeum but declines. Virginia and Leonard Woolf's Hogarth Press issues Poems, his second volume of poetry. Eliot reads and is impressed by James Joyce's Ulysses in its serial publication. He lectures on "Poetry" in London, and publishes "Tradition and the Individual Talent" in The Egoist.

1920 Publishes Ara Vos Prec in England, and Knopf issues Poems including the addition of "Gerontion" - in the United States. In August Eliot meets James Joyce in Paris and takes a cycling tour in northern France with Wyndham Lewis. The Sacred Wood, Eliot's first collection of essays, is published by Methuen.

1921 Begins to draft The Waste Land. From June to August Eliot's mother, his sister Marian, and his brother Henry visit from the United States. In the fall Eliot suffers a breakdown, seeks medical help, and receives a leave from Lloyd's Bank. He goes to Margate, Kent, by the sea to recuperate, and then to Lausanne, Switzerland, where he is treated by Dr. Roger Vittoz. In November, Eliot shows Ezra Pound drafts of The Waste Land.

1922 Eliot's health is still unstable, but he decides to found and edit a new journal, the Criterion, which he edits until he closes it down in 1939. He finishes The Waste Land and publishes it in

the first issue of the Criterion in October. The Dial publishes The Waste Land in the United States, and Eliot receives the Dial prize. Boni and Liverwright publish The Waste Land in book form.

Virginia and Leonard Woolf publish The Waste Land in book form with their Hogarth Press; the poem has already sold 1,250 copies in the United States through the Boni and Liverwright publication. Vivien's health is very poor. Eliot is emotionally and physically taxed by full-time work at Lloyd's Bank, running the Criterion, and various personal struggles. The "Bel Esprit" (the "Eliot Fellowship Fund") is launched in an effort by friends and admirers to allow Eliot to leave his job at the bank.

Leaves Lloyd's Bank to work with Faber and Gwyer (later Faber and Faber). Publishes Poems 1909-1925, which includes "The Hollow Men."

Gives Clark lectures at Cambridge University. Publishes Sweeney Agonistes. Falls to his knees while visiting Michelangelo's Pietà in Rome.

Baptized into the Church of England by W. Force Stead at Holy Trinity Church, Bishop's Palace Cuddesdon, near Oxford. He also takes British citizenship.

Eliot's mother dies.
1930 Publishes Ash-Wednesday with Faber and Faber, with print runs in the United States and Britain.

1932 Delivers Charles Eliot Norton lectures at Harvard University for several months (through March 1933). Publishes Selected Essays: 1917-1932.

Separates from his wife, Vivien Eliot. Publishes After Strange Gods. Lectures at Johns Hopkins University and at the University of Virginia.

Visits Burnt Norton manor in the Cotswolds with Emily Hale.

Murder in the Cathedral is first performed at Canterbury Cathedral.

1936
1938

1939

1940
1943

1945

1946

1948

1950

1952

1953

1957

Publishes Collected Poems 1909-1935; the volume includes the first publication of Burnt Norton.

With her brother, Maurice Haigh-Wood, Eliot commits Vivien Eliot to a mental hospital, Northumberland House, Finsbury Park, London. She will remain there until her death in 1947. Eliot meets Mary Trevelyan.

Publishes Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats and The Family Reunion. Ceases publication of the Criterion, in part due to his growing disillusionment about the possibility for genuine pan-European exchanges of ideas and literatures. The Second World War breaks out. Eliot volunteers as a firewatcher and air-raid warden in London.

Publishes The Idea of a Christian Society.
Publishes all of Four Quartets, which had each already appeared in individual pamphlet form. Notes Towards the Definition of Culture appears serially.

Visits Ezra Pound at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington, DC. The war ends.

Moves in with the critic, John Davy Hayward, with whom he lives until Eliot marries Valerie Fletcher Eliot in 1957.

Eliot is awarded the Order of Merit and the Nobel Prize in Literature. Selected Poems is published by Penguin, with a run of 50,000 copies. Notes Towards the Definition of Culture is published in book form. He lectures at Princeton University and travels to Andover, Massachusetts, to see Emily Hale.

Publishes The Cocktail Party, and it is performed at the Edinburgh Festival.

The Complete Poems and Plays is published by Harcourt in New York. Sees Emily Hale again in Andover, Massachusetts.

Travels with Emily Hale and his sister Marian to St. Louis.
Eliot marries Valerie Fletcher, his secretary at Faber and Faber since 1949, in secret at St. Barnabus Church, London. Their years together were ones he described as his happiest. Breaks off contact with Emily Hale.

1961 Delivers his last public lecture, "To Criticize the Critic."
1963 After collapsing in December 1962 he spends five weeks in hospital in London in an oxygen tent. Collected Poems 1909-1962 published by Harcourt in New York.

1965 Eliot dies on January 4 in London. Following his wishes, his ashes are later interred in St. Michael and All Angels Anglican Church, East Coker.
