# CHAPTER THREE 

## IMMENSE. MAGNIFICENT. TERRIBLE.

READING THE WASTE LAND

TO BE YOUNG, TO BE RICH, and to be in Paris—perhaps enough to turn anyone's head. Certainly it had some such effect on John Peale Bishop (1892-1944), an aspiring poet who had graduated in I9I7 from Princeton University, where his best friends had included F. Scott Fitzgerald and the soon-to-be distinguished critic Edmund Wilson. After a brief stint of service in the armed forces, Bishop had become the managing editor of Vanity Fair, a job he gave up in early I922 when he married Margaret Hutchins, a young woman of independent wealth. Having turned over his position at Vanity Fair to Wilson, Bishop set off on his honeymoon in Europe. It was while there, in Paris, that he had briefly met Ezra Pound in August I922 to discuss the possibility of Vanity Fair's publishing The Waste Land, a last service on behalf of his erstwhile employer. Bishop, of course, had never read the poem and knew about it only through the rumors then circulating in the New York publishing world, rumors that Pound himself had helped set in motion. But nothing came of their discussion, and Bishop soon left to resume his honeymoon.

It was late October when he returned to Paris. He was settling in for a year to undertake some serious writing. His first book, a collection of poems and prose pieces that was titled The Undertaker's Garland, had been published only a few weeks earlier, and he was eager to begin on new

work. On 3 November, Bishop wrote to Wilson, known to good friends as "Bunny," describing his circumstances:

Dear Bunny:
Well here we are installed in an apartment neatly placed between the Opera and the wild wild joints of Montmartre; the location has, so to say, a symbolic significance. The place belongs to two decayed members of the French gentility who, being much fallen in estate and finance have been obliged to let half their formerly enormous quarters. . . . We have then, one large salon furnished quite chastely with a touch of the grand manner; a smaller salon which we are using as a dining room and likewise as the chief living room, it being the warmest room. M[argaret] has her own bedroom and mine is large, light and sufficiently remote to make it a very excellent place to work. Imagine me then pecking zestfully at my newly repaired typewriter beside a wood fire in silence and solitude.

But in the midst of "pecking zestfully," Bishop found that something was haunting all his attempts at writing. It was The Waste Land. In Paris, Bishop had picked up a copy of the first issue of the Criterion, published only two weeks earlier and containing Eliot's poem (though without the notes, included only later when the poem was issued as an independent book).

I am trying to work out an elaborate form which will be partly lyrical, partly descriptive, partly dramatic. . . . I need not say that the chief difficulty is to eradicate T. S. Eliot from all future work. . . . I have read The Waste Land about five times a day since the copy of the Criterion came into my hands. It is immense. Magnificent. terrible. I have not yet been able to figure it all out; especially the fortune telling episode, the king my brother and the king my father, and the strange words that look like a Hindu puzzle to me. I have not of course had the advantage of the notes which you say the book version will contain. Perhaps you can enlighten me on the following points: Mr. Eugenides (his significance), Magnus Martyr, Phlebas the Phoenician. The red rock is I take it the modern world both intellectual and mechanical. But the cock crowing, presaging

the dawn and rain? And what is the experience referred to in the last section with all the DAs in it? Do you recognize Le Prince d'Aquitaine de la tour abolie or shantih?

I don't think he has ever used his stolen lines to such terrifying effect as in this poem. And the hurry up please it's time makes my flesh creep.

Bishop had no time to write further but pledged to communicate again as soon as he learned anything more about The Waste Land.

To his surprise, he would soon learn far more than he ever expectedand from a source with remarkable authority. He hastened to notify Wilson:

Dear Bunny,
Ezra and Mrs. Pound came to dinner last night and I wished many times that you might have been here to see the great Amurricn Poet work out. There's a lot of his past that came out after he had begun to get into his cups, which was fairly soon, as well as a few points about Tears Eliot (as some Paris wit has recently christened him); the latter I feel I should at once communicate to you.

TSE came abroad with the idea of working up his PhD, presumably in philosophy though of this I'm not sure, and turned up one day on Pound's doorstep. Ezra had heard of him from Harvard and at once, upon hearing that he had some poems, suggested getting out the Catholic Anthology, which P[ound] afterward did, just to publish Eliot whose work at that time EP had not seen. Then he advised him against vers libre.

Eliot is tubercular and disposed toward epilepsy; on one occasion he decided to kill himself in Pound's house but funked at the final moment. "The Psychological Hour" in Lustra gives EP's reactions to TSE's wedding, which was substituted on the spur of the moment for a tea engagement at Pound's. It seems that Thomas and Vivien arrived in the hallway and then turned back, went to the registrar's and were wed, to everybody's subsequent pain and misery. She is an English lady, daughter of a member of the Royal Academy and sister of an officer in the Guards. She likewise is an invalid and according to Muriel Draper very weary and washed out. Eliot's version of her is

contained in "the Chair she sat in like a burnished throne" etc. passage. By the way do you know that the hurry up please it's time is what the bartenders say when the English pubs are about to close? The conversation is evidently gleaned from one of the ten o'clock, just-before-closing bickers in a pub, and according to EP reflects the atmosphere immediately outside their first flat in London. Eliot, it seems, is hopelessly caught in his own prudent temperament. As EP says, "I am too low for any steamroller to flatten me out; I can always creep out of the way. But Eliot is incapable of taking the least chance." As one would have surmised.

Mr. Eugenides actually turned up at Lloyds with his pocket full of currants and asked Eliot to spend a weekend with him for no nice reasons. His place in the poem is, I believe, as a projection of Eliot, however. That is, all the men are in some way deprived of their life-giving, generative forces. Phlebas is simply dead, like the Knight in the Gawain version of the Grail (also like Attis and the Attis dummy, see Miss Weston); the Fisher King is castrated; the one-eyed merchant a homosexual. I do not of course mean to imply that Thomas is that any more than that he is physically nutted.

Bishop went on to summarize his new understanding of Eliot's poem:
Please disregard any queries I made before about The Waste Land; I think I've cleared up the meaning of the poem as far as it is possible. From Pound's account, it was originally twice as long and included Bleistein and all the old familiar faces. It's my present opinion that the poem is not so logically constructed as I had at first supposed and that it is a mistake to seek for more than a suggestion of personal emotion in a number of passages. The nightingale passage is, I believe, important. Eliot being Tereus, and Mrs. E. Philomel; that is to say that through unbalanced passion everybody is in a hell of a fix, Tereus being changed to a hoopoo and TSE a bank clerk. Thomas's sexual troubles are undoubtedly extreme.

But, as if to hint that Bishop's complacent reading of The Waste Land barely

concealed a lingering dissatisfaction and preoccupation, he added a concluding note on the progress of his own poems: "I have written quantities or half-written them to destroy them later. I don't seem to be able to get the direction right. And am much discouraged and would give a great deal for your counsel." ${ }^{1}$ Bishop, in fact, would never quite get over The Waste Land or Eliot's accumulating oeuvre. The four volumes of poetry that he wrote over the course of his lifetime bear witness to a poet struggling desperately to escape the shackles of a compulsive fascination with Eliotic motifs and devices.

Bishop's two letters, neither of them published until now, are important. For apart from a brief paragraph written by James Sibley Watson, Jr., a co-editor of the Dial who first read The Waste Land in August 1922 (see pp. 84-85), they are the only record we have of how Eliot's work was first experienced by that hypothetical beast that has haunted so many literary discussions, the well-educated general reader. And plainly that experience, as registered in Bishop's first letter, was something close to terrifying ("such terrifying effect"), terror accompanied by a sense of the poem's compulsive and uncanny power ("I have read [it] five times a day since the copy of the Criterion came into my hands") and its overwhelming horror (". . . makes my flesh creep"). These experiences accumulate in a palpable sense of confusion, patent in Bishop's bewildered attempt to orient himself, to identify the nature or status of entities that are named in the poem: "Mr. Eugenides (his significance), Magnus Martyr, Phlebas the Phoenician."

Part of his confusion, of course, is cultural. An innocent abroad, Bishop doesn't yet know that "HURRY UP PLEASE IT's TIME" is simply the closingtime call of a barman in British pubs. Likewise, he evidently assumes that "Magnus Martyr," a real church, designed by Christopher Wren in the late seventeenth century and located near the northern end of London Bridge, is on the same plane as "Phlebas the Phoenician," a wholly fictional character invented by Eliot. And he is clearly entertaining two different, perhaps incompatible readings of the poem: he is convinced that it represents a certain reckoning with the modern world (a view implicit in his comment about "the red rock"), but is also predisposed to view it in very traditional terms that regard lyrical poetry as a form of autobiography, a rehearsal of personal experience (evident in his query: "And what is the experience referred to in the last section with all the DAs in it?").

But part of Bishop's confusion has deeper roots, some of them discernible in his throw-away comment: "And the hurry up please it's time makes my flesh creep." When he writes his first letter, this line reverberates so much for Bishop precisely because it is uttered by a voice that lacks any clear or obvious origin; it violates our acquired habit of assigning sound to an identifiable source, or voice to an identifiable speaker. Repeated five times toward the close of part II, the last two in direct succession, it acquires an accelerating, frightening urgency, made all the more unbearable because it also has no discernible effect on the speech of that other voice which it cuts into, that of the nameless neighbor of Lil whose Cockney monologue rattles on unheeding, dementedly. For Bishop, plainly, these words become a literary counterpart to the experience of overloaded sound, a phonic order of the sort that we associate with the auditory hallucinations that afflict the psychotic and the ecstatic, or those seemingly possessed by spirits, or that we typically ascribe to divine annunciation and oracular utterance. A voice without any source or origin, such as the one that utters (to Bishop, at least) "HURRY UP PLEASE IT's TIME," is often one that exhorts ("HURRY UP") or warns ("IT's TIME") and acquires a note of menace that threatens subjection to an overwhelming power. ${ }^{2}$ And it is precisely that sense of overwhelming menace, of terror, that Bishop experiences in this line ("makes my flesh creep").

Bishop, however inadvertently, has also stumbled across one of the major sources of the poem's uncanny power, our extreme uncertainty over just who is speaking at any particular moment in The Waste Land. That note of mysterious and oracular utterance which attends the poem's famous opening passage owes much to our bewilderment, our baffled inability to assign its voice to a speaker. And our disorientation about voice and identity only deepens when the first pronoun to appear in the poem ("Winter kept us warm . . .") ends up having a perceptibly different referent when it reappears just three lines later ("Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee"). Throughout the poem there is a deep, perennial ambiguity about the identity of that intermittent "I" who begins with commands ("Come in under the shadow of this red rock") or promises of enigmatic instruction ("I will show you fear in a handful of dust"), yet concludes with increasingly helpless questions ("Who is the third who walks . . . But who is that on the other side . . . What is that sound . . . Who are those hooded hordes . . . What is the city over the mountains," or even "Shall I

at least set my lands in order?"). And is that final, perplexed, and plaintive "I" really the same individual who, when Madame Sosostris hands out Tarot cards to an unidentified recipient

Here, said she,
Is your card, the drowned Phoenician sailor
offers the cruel and knowing interjection:
(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
(And if so, what has happened to transform him by the poem's end, to change him from a fierce and canny commentator into a bewildered, selfignorant questioner?) Bishop, no doubt mistakenly and yet also insightfully, ascribes the voice who speaks hURRY UP PLEASE IT's TIME to a recurrent order of oracular interjection (after all, it repeatedly issues commands: "Come in under the shadow . . ." "Look!" "HURRY UP"), an order fraught with uncertainty that is deeply disturbing.

Bishop's observation can be extended. For identity in The Waste Land is always enigmatic, shrouded in mystery. Characters rarely have names: the middle-class woman who speaks at the beginning of part II remains as nameless as the working-class neighbor of Lil and Albert. The hyacinth girl, the house-agent's clerk, the typist, the Thames-daughters-all lack names. They also lack any of the features that typically signal individual identity: eyes or hair of a certain color, bodies of a certain height or build. (Only the young man carbuncular is . . . well, carbuncular, and has "one bold stare"; the ghoulish woman in part IV has "long black hair," but it makes "whisper music"; more weirdly, only the "bats with baby faces" have human features.) They may be agents, but they seldom act. Instead, action is either delegated to dissevered body parts via synechdoche or inanimate things via personification, or else it mysteriously transpires through the passive voice: footsteps shuffle, hair spreads and glows in fiery points, the eyes and back turn upward, exploring hands encounter no defense, faces sneer and snarl; there are months that breed and mix and stir, seasons that cover, feed, and surprise, snow that is forgetful, shadows that stride behind you or rise to meet you, the evening hour that strives homeward, the human engine that waits like a taxi throbbing waiting, the currents that pick bones in whispers, dry grass that sings, towers that toll, a door that swings, limp leaves that wait for rain, a jungle that crouches; vanity

requires no response, while death undoes so many; sighs are exhaled, while stockings, slippers, camisoles, and stays are piled. This is oneiric syntax, wild and Gothic, eerie and menacing because it severs that basic connection between agent and action, eerier still when punctuated by oracular mumbles uttered by uncertain voices:

Twit twit twit
Jug jug jug jug jug jug
or sinister sounds that issue from hollow places:
And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.
Bishop, in short, was right when he detected apocalyptic menace in "hurry up please it's time." Alas, not for very long. For when Bishop writes his second letter to Edmund Wilson, perhaps ten days later, he has learned to attach identity to that previously mysterious voice: "By the way do you know that hurry up please it's time is what the bartenders say when the English pubs are about to close?" The experience of that voice is no longer an unbearable enigma; it has a source that can be situated in space and time: "The conversation is evidently gleaned from one of the ten o'clock, just-before-closing bickers in a pub, and according to EP reflects the atmosphere immediately outside their first flat in London." It even has a precise address, directly opposite i8, Crawford Mansions. The change is now complete. hurry up please it's time has been transformed from apocalyptic warning to everyday routine, and terrifying uncertainty has been replaced with contented calm: "Please disregard any queries I made before about The Waste Land; I think I've cleared up the meaning of the poem as far as it is possible. . . . It's my present opinion that the poem is not so logically constructed as I had at first supposed and that it is a mistake to seek for more than a suggestion of personal emotion in a number of passages."

Two last points should be noted about Bishop's first letter, written just after reading the poem in a version that did not contain the notes. Tellingly, it never occurs to Bishop to assess the poem in light of the Grail legends, and phrases such as "vegetation gods" or "fertility rituals" never appear in his account. Fertility may well be an intermittent concern in the poem; but the Grail materials are so peripheral to the poem's texture that a discerning, well-educated reader such as Bishop could overlook them entirely.

Not so a reader who would read the poem accompanied by the notes. The other point is that even without the notes Bishop is convinced from the first that the poem is "highly constructed." All those repetitions hinting at symbolic density and development, all those insinuations of spatiotemporal connectedness of the sort found in narrative-surely they urged that the poem was "highly constructed," didn't they? That was precisely the question that would preoccupy the poem's earliest reviewers.

Consider the case of Burton Rascoe (1892-1957), then a thirty-yearold journalist whose weekly feature "A Bookman's Day Book," a diary of his week in the world of books, appeared in Sunday editions of the New York Tribune. Under an entry for "Thursday, October 26," Rascoe registered his receipt of "the November issue of The Dial," the one containing "The Waste Land." Rascoe immediately hailed it as "perhaps the finest poem of this generation," then went on:

At all events it is the most significant in that it gives voice to the universal despair or resignation arising from the spiritual and economic consequences of the war, the cross purposes of modern civilization, the cul-de-sac into which both science and philosophy seem to have got themselves and the breakdown of all great directive purposes which give joy and zest to the business of living. It is an erudite despair. . . . His method is highly elliptical, based on the curious formula of Tristan Corbière, wherein reverential and blasphemous ideas are juxtaposed in amazing antitheses, and there are mingled all the shining verbal toys, impressions and catch lines of a poet who has read voraciously and who possesses an insatiable curiosity about life. . . . The final intellectual impression I have of the poem is that it is extremely clever (by which I do not mean to disparage it; on the contrary): it is a rictus which masks a hurt romantic with sentiments plagued by crass reality; and it is faulty structurally for the reason that, even with the copious (mock and serious) notes he supplies in elucidation, it is so idiosyncratic a statement of ideas that I, for one, cannot follow the narrative with complete comprehension. The poem, however, contains enough sheer verbal loveliness, enough ecstasy, enough psychological verisimilitude, and enough even of

a readily understandable etching of modern life, to justify Mr. Eliot in his idiosyncracies. ${ }^{3}$

Rascoe's reference to "the copious . . . notes" shows that he has been reading Liveright's edition (not the November issue of the Dial which he is ostensibly reviewing). But more important is the way he juxtaposes "the copious . . . notes" to his charge that the poem was "faulty structurally" and his confession that he "cannot follow the narrative with complete comprehension." Contained within that juxtaposition were points of critical debate that would recur again and again in discussion of the poem. To Rascoe, as to many later readers and critics, the notes hinted at levels of narrative and/or structural coherence which jarred with his experience of the poem. To read the poem was to plummet through a series of broken sketches, antic turns, and fitful moments of oracular solemnity and lyrical intensity-a dreamworld experience that startled and disturbed. To read the notes was to find reference to "the plan," an arcane but ultimately identifiable logic that was dictating the poem's entangled movements, or perhaps even a narrative structure detectable behind its unruly opacity.

Moreover, that tension led into two other questions. One concerned The Waste Land's nature, or genre. Was it "a statement of ideas," a meditative poem advancing an argument with claims on public attention, or was it some sort of "narrative"? (Rascoe used both terms within a single sentence.) Or was it perhaps something more private, an expression of some personal feelings? That question led on to another about the nature of poetry, a point that more than any other divides us from Eliot's contemporaries. For us today, a poem is an artifact of language; for them it was axiomatic that a poem communicated "emotion," perhaps not the "emotion recollected in tranquility" of Wordsworth, but "emotion" nevertheless. Consider Edmund Wilson (1890-1972), whose review of the poem appeared in the same December issue of the Dial which announced Eliot's receipt of the Dial Award. Yes, Wilson conceded, the poem showed that its author had a "constricted emotional experience," but his acute selfawareness of this limitation was ultimately redemptive, for it generated "intense emotion" or "strange poignancy."

But it is the very acuteness of his suffering from this starvation which gives such poignancy to his art. And, as I say, Mr. Eliot is a poet-that is, he feels intensely and with distinction and

speaks naturally in beautiful verse. . . . His verse is sometimes much too scrappy-he does not dwell long enough upon one idea to give it its proportionate value before passing on to the next—but these drops, though they be wrung from flint, are none the less authentic crystals. . . . The poem is-in spite of its lack of structural unity-simply one triumph after another. . . . That is also why, for all its complicated correspondences and its recondite references and quotations, The Waste Land is intelligible at first reading. It is not necessary to know anything about the Grail Legend or any but the most obvious of Mr. Eliot's allusions to feel the force of the intense emotion which the poem is intended to convey. . . . In Eliot the very images and the sound of the words-even when we do not know precisely why he has chosen them-are charged with a strange poignancy which seems to bring us into the heart of the singer.

Wilson seems to have intuited, however, the danger that shadowed this emphasis on "intense emotion." For why should anyone's "intense emotion" be thought to have a claim on public attention, let alone receive a significant prize? He hastily added: "And sometimes we feel that he is speaking not only for a personal distress, but for the starvation of a whole civilization -for people grinding at barren office-routine in the cells of gigantic cities, drying up their souls in eternal toil whose products never bring them profit, where their pleasures are so vulgar and so feeble that they are almost sadder than their pains. It is our whole world of strained nerves and shattered institutions." ${ }^{4}$

While Rascoe detected a tension between the intellectual clarity that was seemingly proclaimed by the notes and the poem's genuine opacity, and Edmund Wilson had dismissed the Grail legend as peripheral to experiencing the poem itself, Gilbert Seldes (1893-1970) sketched the outlines of a wholly different view. Seldes began his review of The Waste Land with an overview of Eliot's critical writings-and he was uniquely placed to do so. As managing editor of the Dial during I92I, he had published four of the ten essays that Eliot wrote while composing The Waste Land ("London Letters," which commented on the literary scene in London). ${ }^{5}$ He himself had read Eliot's meditations on music hall and caricature; had noted Eliot's celebration of music-hall "wit" that was "mordant, ferocious,

and personal," or his praise for the performer Ethel Levey, with her "fascinating inhuman grotesquerie" and "element of bizarrerie"; had observed Eliot's predilection for the extremism of the great caricaturists Rowlandson and Cruikshank, artists who possessed "some of the old English ferocity"; had witnessed Eliot's "sense of relief" at "hearing the indecencies of Elizabethan and Restoration drama"; had savored Eliot's vindication of Stravinsky's Sacre du printemps, a work that had transformed "the rhythms of the steppes into the scream of the motor horn, the rattle of machinery, the grind of wheels, the beating of iron and steel, the roar of the underground railway, and the other barbaric cries of modern life." ${ }^{6}$ Moreover, the discontinuous yet coherent outline of an aesthetics of the histrionic which Eliot drew in these essays could hardly have reached a more receptive observer: Seldes had already written trenchant essays examining jazz and popular film, and one month after writing his review of Eliot he began his own landmark work, The 7 Lively Arts, a survey of vaudeville, popular song, the cartoon strip, slapstick film, and other forms of vernacular culture. But when he took up Eliot's critical writings, he disregarded all the Eliot essays that he himself had shepherded through the editorial process. Instead he turned directly to The Sacred Wood and promptly fastened on "Tradition and the Individual Talent."

Read in the light of that essay, The Waste Land might well seem a bit odd, a little unruly—only for a moment, though.

It seems at first sight remarkably disconnected, confused, the emotion seems to disengage itself in spite of the objects and events chosen by the poet as their vehicle. . . . A closer view of the poem does more than illuminate the difficulties; it reveals the hidden form of the work, indicates how each thing falls into place, and to the reader's surprise shows that the emotion which at first seemed to come in spite of the framework and the detail could not otherwise have been communicated. ${ }^{7}$

By "framework," of course, Seldes meant the Grail legends as interpreted by Jessie Weston's From Ritual to Romance, the work which had informed "the plan" of Eliot's poem-or so its notes said. If only one scrutinized the poem long and diligently enough, "the hidden form" that bound together the dichotomy of text and notes would be disclosed. (Curiously,

Seldes himself did not further describe this "hidden form," which remained "hidden" to his readers.)

More directly than any other critic of the time, Conrad Aiken (18901972) addressed the dilemmas posed by the notes. Aiken, of course, had known Eliot since his student days at Harvard, knowledge which placed him in a unique position vis-à-vis other critics. For he also knew that passages of The Waste Land had existed as poems or independent drafts years before the poem's publication, and years before the publication of Jessie Weston's book. But he felt that it would be unfair somehow to reveal that knowledge, as he later recalled: "How could I mention that I had long been familiar with such passages as 'A woman drew her long black hair out tight,' which I had seen as poems, or part-poems, in themselves? And now saw inserted into The Waste Land as into a mosaic. This would be to make use of private knowledge, a betrayal." ${ }^{8}$ Having ruled out a more historical reckoning with the poem, Aiken proceeded to a more formal one that stressed the disparity between the poem's wild variety and the claims to extreme coherence implied by the reference to "the plan" made in the notes.

If we leave aside for the moment all other considerations and read the poem solely with the intention of understanding, with the aid of the notes, the symbolism; of making out what it is that is symbolized, and how these symbolized feelings are brought into relation with each other and with other matters in the poem; I think we must, with reservations, and with no invidiousness, conclude that the poem is not, in any formal sense, coherent.

With great prescience, Aiken foresaw the trajectory of critical discussion of the poem: "It is perhaps important to note that Mr. Eliot, with his comment on the 'plan,' and several critics, with their admiration of the poem's woven complexity, minister to the idea that The Waste Land is, precisely, a kind of epic in a walnut shell: elaborate, ordered, unfolded with a logic at every joint discernible; but it is also important to note that this idea is false." Aiken, instead, placed emphasis elsewhere: "Thus the poem has an emotional value far clearer and richer than its arbitrary and rather unworkable logical value. One might assume that it originally consisted of a number of separate poems which have been telescoped—given a kind

of forced unity." His sense of the poem's factitiousness even included a rudimentary account of what he called "arbitrary repetitions": "We are aware of a superficial 'binding'—we observe the anticipation and repetition of themes, motifs; 'Fear death by water' anticipates the episode of Phlebas, the cry of the nightingale is repeated, but these are pretty flimsy links, and do not genuinely bind because they do not reappear naturally, but arbitrarily." True, critics of today would not accept the easy distinction drawn between "naturally" and "arbitrarily," and Aiken's account of repetition is one that vastly oversimplifies. But Aiken astutely perceived the strains and stresses in the poem, and he fretted over what kind of unity of tone or genre might encompass them: "Could one not wholly rely for one's unity,—as Mr. Eliot has largely relied-simply on the dim unity of 'personality' which would underlie the retailed contents of a single consciousness?"

Yet he had no doubt about the poem's success or significance: "the poem succeeds-as it brilliantly does-by virtue of its incoherence, not of its plan; by virtue of its ambiguities, not of its explanations." It was, he concluded, "one of the most moving and original poems of our time. It captures us." ${ }^{9}$

Taken together, Rascoe, Wilson, Seldes, and Aiken had outlined the spectrum of possible responses to a perceived disparity between their experience of the poem and the kind of experience that seemed to be suggested by its notes. At one extreme of the spectrum was Gilbert Seldes, who conceded that parts of the poem at first seemed "remarkably disconnected" and "confused," but who was convinced that these difficulties would evaporate with "a closer view" that disclosed a "hidden form" in which "each thing falls into place." At the other extreme was Conrad Aiken. For him, opacity wasn't an obstacle, but the condition that informed the poem's achievement ("the poem succeeds . . . by virtue of its incoherence"). In the middle of the spectrum were Rascoe and Wilson. For them the poem, whether judged against the expectations raised by the notes or those of competent readers, was "faulty structurally" (Rascoe) or exhibited "a lack of structural unity" (Wilson). And for both there was a tension between the poem's raw beauty, its "sheer verbal loveliness" (Rascoe) or "the very images and the sound of the words" (Wilson), and its obdurate opacity, its many "idiosyncracies" (Rascoe) or unmotivated tangles: "We do not know why he has chosen them" (Wilson). For both these, too, the poem possessed a recognizable claim on public attention: it was "a readily understandable

etching of modern life" (Rascoe), or it was "speaking not only for a personal distress, but for the starvation of a whole civilization" (Wilson).

Rascoe, Wilson, Seldes, and Aiken were not, of course, the only critics to review The Waste Land shortly after its publication; but their views and arguments laid out the fault lines that would reappear in subsequent debate. Tellingly, too, all four were American. Elevated by the Dial Award, Eliot's poem tacitly acquired a claim that it was a matter of public significance, a literary work of compelling importance. The debate that followed was a logical consequence of the institutional structures that had shaped its publication. And the contrast with the situation in England could not have been starker. Because the poem was first published there (without the notes) in the Criterion, a new journal struggling to find an audience, and then eleven months later was issued in the Hogarth Press edition that was limited to 460 copies, it received very little media attention: three reviews in the wake of the Criterion publication, a further six after the Hogarth edition-and all but one of the nine were hostile. In the United States, in contrast, there were more than fifty reviews and notices of the poem, more or less equally divided between negative and positive evaluations. ${ }^{10}$

When subsequent debate was taken up, it took place in the shadow of another event, at first glance one wholly unrelated to The Waste Land: T. S. Eliot's religious conversion. In 1928, only six years after he had published The Waste Land, Eliot issued For Lancelot Andrewes, a collection of eight recent essays preceded by a preface in which Eliot announced that he was now a "classicist in literature, a royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic in religion. ${ }^{11}$ It was a deliberately provocative statement, and since then it has often been quoted as if it sufficed to characterize the whole of Eliot's work and life. It was an impression that Eliot himself did much to foster in subsequent years. In 1932 he published his Selected Essays, 1917-1932, a compilation of book reviews and essays that he had been writing. The first piece in the book was "Tradition and the Individual Talent," an essay from I9I9 in which Eliot had urged that the personality of the individual artist be submerged or expunged in his work, submitting to the imperatives of a vague tradition. Perhaps innocently, Eliot even misdated the essay, assigning it to I9I7 and so making it stand as the gateway to all his subsequent work, including The Waste Land. ${ }^{12}$ Of the ten essays that Eliot wrote while composing The Waste Land, only three were included in the Selected

Essays-all pieces which reinforced the impression that Eliot had always been a "classicist in literature." Suppressed were the other seven essays from the same period, which only recently have been reprinted for the first time (after eighty-three years). ${ }^{13}$ The suppressed essays, which reveled in the vernacular pleasures of British music hall and caricature, had sketched an aesthetics that could be called "classicist" only by a remarkable extension of the term. But that was all in the past. Similarly, the Selected Essays gave special prominence to a piece which Eliot had recently written on Baudelaire, one in which he damned the French poet for "having an imperfect, vague romantic conception of Good. ${ }^{14}$ This theological estimate of the French poet jarred against the unstinting admiration which Eliot had shown for him in I92I. Eliot's conversion to Christianity, his growing allegiance to conservative political and social views, his concern with the aesthetic and ethical force of classicism-these constituted a profound change in his thought. But it was a change that was masked by the Selected Essays, which instead suggested that Eliot had always been a classicist, had always had moral concerns that had only deepened with his conversion, had always viewed modernity (and so secularism) with a skeptical eye.

In the new climate of taste, one that Eliot himself did much to usher in, there was no longer a tension between the text of The Waste Land and the claims to coherence implied by the notes' reference to "the plan." The problem that had preoccupied the poem's early reviewers vanished from sight. The most influential critic in erasing that tension was Cleanth Brooks (1907-I994), an American critic and a devout Christian from the conservative South. In I937 he published "The Waste Land: A Critique of the Myth," an essay that profoundly shaped the course of criticism on the poem for the next forty years. ${ }^{15}$ Brooks set out to show that the poem was "a unified whole" (I36), that every detail in it contributed to a work of extraordinary structural, thematic, and poetic integrity. Characteristically, his starting point was the first of the poem's notes, the one which urged: "Not only the title, but the plan and a good deal of the incidental symbolism of the poem were suggested by Miss Jessie L. Weston's book . . ." No less characteristically, Brooks urged that the theme of the poem could best be reconstructed from Eliot's I930 essay on Baudelaire, the one in which he had repudiated Baudelaire's "imperfect, vague romantic conception of Good." (That a term such as "Good" appears nowhere in Eliot's writings from the period when he was composing The Waste Land deterred Brooks

not a moment.) As for critics who had earlier described a poem more entangled and disquieting than the one delineated by Brooks, they were merely victims of "the myth" that had quickly gathered around the poem.

Brooks had grown up in the American South at a time when it could still be viewed, through a haze of ahistorical nostalgia, as the last outpost of a preindustrial order, one rooted in the land and agriculture. His disdain for industry, science, popular culture, and every other index of modernity was summarized in a single word: secularization. And by a form of logic which is all too human, it turned out that secularization was damned by passage after passage in The Waste Land. When the poem cites a passage from Dante's description of Limbo, in canto III of the Inferno, Brooks notes that these "characters exemplify almost perfectly the secular attitude which dominates the modern world" (I43-I44). He saw no anachronism in this claim. Those depicted in Dante's canto IV are the unbaptized: "They form the second of the two classes of people who inhabit the modern waste land: those who are secularized and those who have no knowledge of the faith" (I44). When the poem seemingly touches on the violation of a woman, Brooks comments drily: "The violation of a woman makes a very good symbol of the process of secularization" (I47). If one had to summarize the poem one might say: "Our contemporary waste land is in large part the result of our scientific attitude-of our complete secularization" (I48). And in passing he observed that "secularization has destroyed, or is likely to destroy, modern civilization" (I63-I64). The fishmen relaxing in a pub near St. Magnus Martyr are significant because "they have a meaningful life which has been largely lost to the secularized upper and middle classes" (I70). The Waste Land, in short, was being beaten into shape, forced to accord with a simplistic and schematic view of history that saw the world before the industrial revolution as a coherent unity organized around religious faith, the world after it as one long, unremitting, everworsening horror. And Eliot himself, it must be conceded, was wont to indulge in such thinking during the I930s-for example, "What I do wish to affirm is that the whole of modern literature is corrupted by what I call Secularism." ${ }^{16}$ But damning secularization, for Brooks, was not quite enough. By the end of his essay he claimed: "The Christian material is at the center [of the poem]," conceding only that "the poet never deals with it directly" (I7I).

No less important, Brooks profoundly transformed the poem's nature.

Consider his comment on the verse paragraph that makes up the poem's famous opening, with its ferocious excess of lexical, syntactic, and thematic gestures toward pattern, its uneasy progress through evanescent zones of tonal cohesion, its mercurial swing from oracular solemnity to conversational banality, from insistent pattern to empty patter. Brooks, after announcing that the poem's theme was "death-in-life," turned to its famous beginning: "The first part of 'The Burial of the Dead' introduces this theme through a sort of reverie on the part of the protagonist-a reverie in which speculation on life glides off into memory of an actual conversation in the Hofgarten and back into speculation again. The function of the conversation is to establish the class and character of the protagonist" (I39). That was one way to deal with troublesome details of tone and texture: to liquidate them in the name of theme, to quash them under the impress of a new entity who appears onstage here for the first time-"the protagonist." It was also the first step in transforming the poem into a narrative.

For Brooks "the protagonist" was a very busy figure, but one whose mental states were instantly accessible to the discerning critic. When a snatch of song abruptly appears in part I, it is "perhaps another item in the reverie of the protagonist" (I4I). But the song has an immediate effect: "It brings to the mind of the protagonist an experience of love" (I4I). Elsewhere we learn:

But the protagonist, after this reflection . . . remembers a death that was transformed into something rich and strange, the death described in the song from The Tempest-"Those are pearls that were his eyes." . . . The description of a death which is a portal into a realm of the rich and strange . . . assumes in the mind of the protagonist an association with that of the drowned god whose effigy was thrown into the water as a symbol of the death of the fruitful powers of nature but which was taken out of the water as a symbol of the revivified god. (See From Ritual to Romance.) (I49-I50)

True, the source and identity of any particular voice in the poem might sometimes seem mysterious. "But to the reader who knows the Weston references, the reference is to that of the Fisher King of the Grail legends. The protagonist is the maimed and impotent king of the legends" (I5I). (And if the protagonist's "class and identity" were established in the poem's

opening verse-paragraph, were they not undergoing a remarkable change at this point-a change so pronounced as to put the notion of "identity" in question, or even in crisis?)

But to be a narrative, it was necessary for the poem to mark progression. Yet no less an authority than the English critic F. R. Leavis, then at the height of his reputation, had already noted the poem's static character: "It exhibits no progression: 'I sat upon the shore / Fishing, with the arid plain behind me'-the thunder brings no rain to revive the Waste Land, and the poem ends where it began. ${ }^{17}$ Brooks was determined to set that right:

I cannot accept Mr. Leavis' interpretation of the passage, "I sat upon the shore / Fishing, with the arid plain behind me," as meaning that the poem "exhibits no progression." The comment upon what the thunder says would indicate, if other passages did not, that the poem does "not end where it began." It is true that the protagonist does not witness a revival of the waste land; but there are two important relationships involved in his case: a personal one as well as a general one. If secularization has destroyed, or is likely to destroy modern civilization, the protagonist still has a personal obligation to fulfill. Even if the civilization is breaking up-London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down-there remains the personal obligation: "Shall I at least set my lands in order?" (I63-I64)

It was a curious non sequitur, for demonstrating that "the protagonist" possessed a "personal obligation" was hardly tantamount to demonstrating narrative progression. Brooks returned to the charge, however, now bent on showing that "the protagonist" exhibited change and development, those features so indispensable to narrative, and he located these in an unlikely place, that final, antic swirl of quotations at the poem's end:

London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina
Quando fiam ceu chelidon-O swallow swallow
Le Prince d'Aquitaine à la tour abolie
These fragments I have shored against my ruins
Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo's mad againe.

Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
Shantih shantih shantih
Brooks seized on the fourth of these eight lines (Le Prince d'Aquitaine à la tour abolie), which is a quotation from a famous sonnet, "El Desdichado" (Spanish for "The Unhappy Man"), by the French poet Gérard de Nerval (1808-1855). In the French original, the immediately preceding line reads, "Je suis le ténébreux,-la veuf,-l'inconsolé," and together the two lines can be translated:

I am the man of gloom,—the widower,—the unconsoled,
The Prince of Aquitania, his tower in ruins.
Brooks commented: "The quotation from 'El Desdichado,' as Edmund Wilson has pointed out, indicates that the protagonist of the poem has been disinherited, robbed of his tradition. The ruined tower is perhaps also the Perilous Chapel, 'only the wind's home,' and it is also the whole tradition in decay. The protagonist resolves to claim his tradition and rehabilitate it." Brooks, by a species of logic which I have never been able to follow, could now specify not only the poem's "protagonist" but also his progress as discerned through a resolution that he reaches just before the poem's end. Yes, some aspects of the poem might seem enigmatic or disturbing; but beneath the surface there were traces of a narrative largely compatible with our everyday notions of realism. The poem gave "the effect of chaotic experience ordered into a new whole, though the realistic surface of experience is faithfully retained" (167).

Perhaps we can better understand this remark about "the realistic surface of experience" by situating it within a context much broader than that of The Waste Land or the critical tradition that first attended it, a context that stretches all the way back to Aristotle's Poetics, that seminal essay of literary theory which has exerted such a profound sway over Western cultural thought. Aristotle, we recall, was bent on refuting Plato's charge that poetry and fiction (one and the same in ancient Greece) were mendacious, and hence to be banned from a well ordered republic. Instead, he wished to assert that fiction or drama sparked a process of inference and deduction which was fundamentally the same as that of philosophy, and therefore that it issued in a form of knowledge that was different, but of equal status. The key term in prompting this process, whether in philosophy

or imaginative writing, was "wonder." For wonder, he wrote in the Metaphysics, lay at the heart of all philosophy:

It is through wonder that men now begin and originally began to philosophize; wondering in the first place at obvious perplexities, and then by gradual progression raising questions about the greater matters too, e.g., about the changes of the moon and of the sun, about the stars and about the origin of the universe. Now he who wonders and is perplexed feels that he is ignorant (thus the myth-lover [for "myth" here, read "fiction"] is in a sense a philosopher, since myths are composed of wonders). ${ }^{18}$

A similar process, he urges in the Poetics (chapter 9), is set in motion by the complex plot of a tragedy:

Since tragic mimesis portrays not just a whole action, but events which are fearful and pitiful, this can best be achieved when things occur contrary to expectation yet still on account of one another. A sense of wonder will be more likely to be aroused in this way than as a result of the arbitrary or fortuitous, since even chance events make the greatest impact of wonder when they appear to have a purpose. ${ }^{19}$

A tragic plot should include actions or events that surprise us ("things [that] occur contrary to expectation"), for that sense of surprise will prompt us to wonder how the events have come about; at the same time, however, those events must exhibit spatiotemporal and logical-causal interconnectedness, for if they do not, then the process of reasoning that attempts to discern such connectedness will be in vain. The opacity of the wonderful is indispensable to tragedy, but it must always be only momentary opacity that is ultimately redeemed by reason's discernment of sequential intelligibility. Oedipus cannot be blinded just because the gods are spiteful or capricious; it must be an outcome of his earlier actions.

Later in the Poetics (chapter 24), however, when comparing the different characteristics of tragedy and epic, Aristotle situates the wonderful (or "the marvelous": both words translate the same term in Aristotle's Greek) in a more ambiguous context:

While the marvellous is called for in tragedy, it is epic which gives greater scope for the irrational (which is the chief cause of the marvellous), because we do not actually see the agents [onstage]. The circumstances of the pursuit of Hector would be patently absurd if put on the stage, with the men standing and refraining from pursuit, and Achilles forbidding them; but in epic the effect is not noticed. The marvellous gives pleasure: this can be seen from the way in which everyone exaggerates in order to gratify when recounting events.

Yet only one paragraph later, when Aristotle once more takes up the topic of plot structure, he indirectly returns to the question of the marvelous via a comment on the irrational, a comment with startling implications: "Events which are impossible but plausible should be preferred to those which are possible but implausible. Plots should not consist of parts which are irrational. So far as possible, there should be no irrational component."20 This last comment plainly contradicts the preceding one. For if every irrational (or unmotivated) component is to be excluded from a plot, and if at the same time the irrational is "the chief cause of the marvellous," then it follows that Aristotle has also excluded the marvelous from all plot construction-despite his having earlier deemed it indispensable to tragedy. Stephen Halliwell, the distinguished contemporary commentator on the Poetics, urges that for Aristotle wonder "lies on the boundary of the explicable and the inexplicable, and so can slip into the latter (and hence become the irrational), or, properly used, may stimulate and challenge understanding." ${ }^{21}$ Still, it is hard to avoid the impression that the wonderful entails more vexing conundrums: we want opacity, but we also fear it; we relish transgression, but we also crave order. The wonderful marks the uneasy borderline between these contradictory desires. Tellingly, the passage from the Iliad that Aristotle dislikes is one of the most famous of antiquity. It occurs in book 22, when Hector and Achilles at last come together for what promises to be the climactic encounter which the work has been building toward for all the previous books. What happens, bizarrely, is nothing. Achilles chases Hector round and round before the walls of Troy, while everyone else watches, frozen in place. The forward movement of narrative is utterly suspended. It elicits a famous simile from Homer, the only simile in ancient epic which invokes a dream:

As in a dream a man is not able to follow one who runs
from him, nor can the runner escape, nor the other pursue him,
So he [Achilles] could not turn him down in his speed, nor the other get clear. ${ }^{22}$

One can only guess what Aristotle would have made of The Waste Land's oneiric syntax and its grim refusal of narrative connectedness.

If Brooks profoundly misread the kind of work that The Waste Land was, he did so partly because an Aristotelian poetics of narrative has become so pervasive in our culture that we scarcely notice its presence. But that pervasiveness may also testify to some deeper human need. Tracts of time or sound, even textual time or sound, unpunctuated by the prospect of their being integrated into meaningful networks, are unbearable. Confronted with inexplicable patterns and mazes of contradiction, we seek a hidden shapeliness that will enable us to accommodate them. Fortuity is insufferable. As Steven Connor has recently observed in a comment that has obvious relevance to a reading of "What the Thunder Said":

The power of a voice without a visible source is the power of a less-than-presence which is also a more-than-presence. The voice that is heard in the thunder, the eruption, or the whirlwind, is a kind of compromise formation. In that it is ascribed to a god, or simply to God, the voice transcends human powers of understanding and control; but the very fact that it is so ascribed also makes it possible to begin exercising control, in the very considerable form of conferring a name. To hear the thunder as a voice is to experience awe and terror; but to hear the voice in the thunder is also to have begun to limit the powers of that voice. ${ }^{23}$

To hear the voice in the thunder, we might add, is to undertake a rudimentary form of spatiotemporal and logical-causal coordination of the sort that makes everyday experience comprehensible, if not bearable, and of the same sort that informs narrative. We are programmed to do this, it seems. Steven Connor ascribes our programming to various aspects of neonatal experience, Frank Kermode to our experience of learning to speak a language. ${ }^{24}$ Whatever its source, it seems to be an indelible feature of

the human mind. Brooks, though plainly a man who had a clear agenda, was also simply human.

Eliot himself, in his later years, evidently felt a need to revisit the two issues that had so decisively shaped discussion about The Waste Landthe status of the notes and the question of the poem's structure. In a lecture that he delivered in I956 to an audience of I4,000 assembled in a basketball arena at the University of Minnesota, he pondered the various ways in which literary critics might be misled:

Here I must admit that I am, on one conspicuous occasion, not guiltless of having led critics into temptation. The notes to The Waste Land I had at first intended to put down all the references for my quotations, with a view to spiking the guns of critics of my earlier poems who had accused me of plagiarism. Then, when it came to print The Waste Land as a little bookfor the poem on its first appearance in The Dial and The Criterion had no notes whatever-it was discovered that the poem was inconveniently short, so I set to work to expand the notes, in order to provide a few more pages of printed matter, with the result that they became the remarkable exposition of bogus scholarship that is still on view to-day. I have sometimes thought of getting rid of these notes; but now they can never be unstuck. They have had almost greater popularity than the poem itself-anyone who bought my book of poems, and found that the notes to The Waste Land were not in it, would demand his money back. . . . No, it is not because of my bad example to other poets that I am penitent; it is because my notes stimulated the wrong kind of interest among the seekers of sources. It was just, no doubt, that I should pay my tribute to the work of Miss Jessie Weston; but I regret having sent so many enquirers off on a wild goose chase after Tarot cards and the Holy Grail. ${ }^{25}$

Eliot's occasional regret at having included the notes was balanced by his wan recognition that the deed was irreversible: the notes, as Stephen Dedalus might have put it, "were lodged in the room of the infinite possibilities they have ousted."

Three years later, in I959, Eliot looked back at the much-debated

question of the poem's structure. When one interviewer asked him whether Pound's excisions had changed "the intellectual structure of the poem," Eliot answered: "No. I think it was just as structureless, only in a more futile way, in the longer version." The implicit acknowledgment that the "shorter version," the published text of The Waste Land as we have it, was "structureless," was a long way from the claim that it was governed by a "plan." And tangled in the sidelong syntax of Eliot's response was another, more striking implication: a work might be structureless, but it could be so in ways that were "more futile" or "less futile." If we put pressure on "less futile," it might almost be thought to imply "useful" in some way, productive for literary thought and practice, provided only that a culture could find some use for it.
"In The Waste Land," Eliot went on in the same interview, "I wasn't even bothering whether I understood what I was saying." But that hardly mattered, he now thought. "These things, however, become easier to people with time. You get used to having The Waste Land, or Ulysses, about."26 For a man who could be scathing about whiggish narratives of cultural progress, it was a surprisingly whiggish account of the human capacity to assimilate fortuity and disorder. The cognitive threshold for accommodating opacity, in this view, is as mutable and changeable as (let us say) our threshold for velocity (we chuckle condescendingly at the accounts of travelers who experienced vertigo when speeding along at ten miles per hour on early railroads). The Waste Land and Ulysses had indeed put unprecedented pressure on our expectations about the kinds and degrees of order that characterize a literary work; but it is a legitimate question whether we have really got "used to" the stringent indeterminacy that these works embodied. The human desire to detect pattern and reduce fortuity may be far more tenacious than Eliot imagined. Literary realism, after all, has survived the course of the twentieth century and even enjoyed a conspicuous revival in recent years. And as anybody knows who has ever taught either work to undergraduates, the struggle against easy expectations of narrative cohesion is not a battle that has been permanently won but one that is annually renewed.

For the most part, Eliot's remarks of I956 and I959 were politely ignored by his admirers, still laboring in the long shadow cast by Cleanth Brooks's major essay. But when Valerie Eliot published her edition of The Waste Land manuscripts in I97I, critical consensus began to dissolve. If

nothing else, the manuscripts showed beyond doubt that The Waste Land had been potentially a very different poem right up to the last minute in early January 1922, when Ezra Pound had deleted some 240 lines. While there was still uncertainty about precisely when or in what sequence the various parts had been composed, it was clear that none had been produced in straightforward accordance with a "plan." The notes were beginning to recede in importance, but their recession would also prove extraordinarily slow and protracted.

At the same time, the dominance of the New Criticism, epitomized by Cleanth Brooks, was drawing to a close and already one could detect beginnings of the turn to structuralism that was to be signaled by the publication of Jonathan Culler's book Structuralist Poetics (1975). ${ }^{27}$ The later I970s and I980s would see structuralism rapidly displaced by poststructuralism and deconstruction, then by several varieties of feminism and the rise of New Historicism, critical paradigms that stressed not the wholeness and unity of the text but its dividedness, the contradictory impulses at work beneath the surface of all language. But for the most part, criticism of The Waste Land has taken an increasingly biographical turn. In that respect, at least, criticism has retraced the trajectory first outlined by John Peale Bishop's two letters from November 1922, which moved from intoxicating and anxious uncertainty to a complacent preoccupation with glimpses of Eliot's private life. At the same time, the New Critical reading of the poem has never entirely vanished and continues to hold sway over the imagination of many critics. One sees its tenacious hold at work in the writing of one recent scholar who repeatedly notes "the poem's marmoreal reserve" and "monumental impregnability." ${ }^{28}$ The notion of a neoclassical monument, so alien to the experience of the poem which its earliest readers described, still exerts a compelling power.

We cannot, of course, return to an imaginary state of pristine innocence in which the critical history of the last eighty years has been miraculously effaced. Generations of students encountered The Waste Land for the first time under aegis of the New Criticism, and many scholars who had that experience are to be found in English departments throughout the world, still active and still performing that invaluable task of transmitting the poem to new generations. But if the free play of attention that we ideally bring to the reading of any work is genuinely to retain its freedom, it will do so not by denying but by probing the intangible pressures exerted by

a highly distinctive critical tradition, one repeatedly molded by historical contingencies as varied and intricate as those that also informed the poem's composition. Doing so, we can remain open to the pleasure of amazement and the sense of wonder that a reading of The Waste Land inevitably brings, attentive to the poem's vertiginous twists and turns of language, responsive to its richly varied ironic and climactic moments, receptive to its lacerating wildness and stubborn refusal to accommodate our expectations.
"immense. magnificent. terrible." Yes, that will do as a starting point.
