# I 

JEAN-MICHEL RABATÉ

## "The World Has Seen Strange Revolutions Since I Died" ${ }^{1}$ : The Waste Land and the Great War

The devastation brought by the First World War to Europe had incalculable consequences that still shape our world; there were also calculable costs, whether financial or moral. T. S. Eliot took on the task to reckon with these, first as a clerk working on German debts and reparations at Lloyds Bank in London, then as a poet who tried to rethink the foundations of the world order emerging after 1918. A war first imagined as a Napoleonic campaign, with swift defeats and victories, had turned into a general stalemate, a mechanized mass slaughter in a bitter tussle of attrition in which most industrialized nations were forced to participate. Never a "war to end all wars," World War I would soon herald worse times to come, partly because the map of the world changed radically after the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire. Europeans had discovered that, indeed, "civilizations were mortal," as Paul Valéry wrote in 1919, when he analyzed the current "crisis of the spirit." ${ }^{2}$ The European "spirit" was a Hegelian Geist that was turning into ghosts, into too many ghosts, whereas the geography of Europe revealed itself to be just the tip of a "peninsula," an excrescence from a continent redefined by the new awakenings of Russia and Asia. A similar ontological crisis was condensed in Eliot's lines from The Waste Land:

Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal ${ }^{3}$

## I. Places

Like Valéry, Eliot included Smyrna (in Turkey) and Alexandria (in Egypt) in his map of Europe, while he, too, perceived that Europe had "exhausted its modernism." ${ }^{4}$ In its symbolic geography, The Waste Land is thus more a modernist postwar poem than a modernist war poem. This holds true of its themes and its gestation, much as Ulysses and In Search of Lost Time

would not be the same texts they are today without the delays in publication brought about by the war. The difference between the authors' processes is that Joyce and Proust used the extra time they gained to expand and revise their novels. Eliot, collecting and rearranging previous texts, writing in the aftermath, attempted to make sense of the collective and personal traumas by condensing and refining (with the help of Ezra Pound) a sprawling mass of manuscripts and typescripts until he reached just 433 lines. Its incantatory and exhortatory affirmation of "Peace" - "Shantih" in Sanskrit - from the Upanishads at the end of the poem looks to a dim European future with a mystical assertion of hope while the poem attempts to give a diagnosis of the causes of the Great War.

If Joyce analyzed a prewar society in Dublin, Eliot looked to the future, as did Franz Kafka. In the end, from two different sides in the conflict, Eliot and Kafka had made similar career choices, both positing a strong link between the raging military conflict and "war" in the sentimental and sexual domains. This link can be exemplified for Eliot by a short story of which he was fond. In December 1917, when the war was raging, The Egoist, of which Eliot had become assistant editor, published "War," a story by his friend Mary Hutchinson. ${ }^{5}$ Mary had passed it first to Vivien, who then made sure her husband would get it published. ${ }^{6}$ Readers must have expected a war story, whereas it mostly deals with love. It begins with a conversation between Jane, a rich, married, and fashionable young lady of twenty-five, and her new would-be lover, Mr. Giniver, a writer, traveler, and self-declared cynic. Their talk is interrupted by drums and a brass band. They see soldiers at drill, marching through a London street. A little later, Jane confides to her friend Sabine that she feels drawn to Giniver. Sabine asserts skeptically that Jane will be a mere diversion for him. Jane grows "hysterical" (171) and convinces herself that she is in love. At night, Giniver reappears for a night visit that proves decisive. He has brought a manuscript but decides not to read it to her. They are both nervous, irritable, embarrassed; their conversation trails off and they keep nagging each other. Finally, silence reigns. Giniver, sensing the chill, cannot seize her hand; Jane makes the break-up final, saying: "I don't suppose we shall meet again for some time" (172). Giniver takes leave abruptly and Jane remains alone, inert. She falls asleep, to be woken up by a bugle sounding the reveille in the nearby barracks. The reminder of a war outside brings relief. The text ends on these words: "Afterwards she slept as though she knew the earth to be a spherical and comfortable place" (172). This is one of the meanings of "war," a meaning to which Eliot was attuned, a delicate blend of the war of sexes, with its tangled strategies of seduction, hysteria, and

rejection, alongside military campaigns, which end up offering a unity of the self with the universe.

It is likely that Mary Hutchinson, who was then very close to both Eliots, was slyly referring to the ups and downs of the affair her friend Vivien Haigh-Wood, Eliot's wife, was having with Bertrand Russell. As with Kafka's particular situation in Prague - Kafka, like Eliot, was not drafted for medical reasons - the war provided these Londoners the opportunity for an ongoing discussion about love, the compatibility of married life with literary creation, and the possibility of torturing one's partner in a couple. The difference was that Kafka would not marry Felice, his eternal bride-to-be. He tortured her (and himself) via an abundant and frantic correspondence. ${ }^{7}$ Sensing the need to put as much distance between his family and himself as he could, Eliot had taken the war as a pretext for a situation of exception that allowed him to get married quickly to a seductive and brilliant English woman. He would torture her (and himself) in words and deeds, in action and in inaction, erecting the temple of eternal love on the murky foundations of sexual impotence and gender indecision.

The war made Eliot aware that he had chosen a place to settle. We can imagine him, had there been no war, moving back and forth between Boston and Marburg, St. Louis and Oxford, New York and Paris. His 1910-11 stay in Paris had given him a taste of cosmopolitan culture and put him in contact with a cultivated French milieu. He was close to Alain-Fournier, who died in combat as a lieutenant near Verdun in September 1914, one of the first literary victims of the war. Another victim of the war was Eliot's close friend from Paris, Jean Verdenal. The echo between Verdun and Verdenal is not a coincidence: the family name "Verdenal" is linked to a village in the Meurthe and Moselle region. It was exactly on the border separating Alsace-Lorraine, the contested German possession after the 1871 war and the treaty of Frankfurt, from the rest of France. That region was the site of many battles in 1914 and 1915, and the inhabitants of Verdenal are called the "Verdunois."

While in Paris in 1910 and 1911, Eliot had shared with Verdenal and Alain-Fournier a love of Wagner and Jules Laforgue, and he had discovered the works of Dostoevsky thanks to Alain-Fournier. Before 1914, these young French intellectuals were more Germanophile than Anglophile, which was a common tendency among later Symbolist poets. Mallarmé's wife was German; Jules Laforgue had spent five happy years in Berlin when he was a reader for the German Empress Augusta. Similarly, as an American living in England, Eliot bore no grudge to Germany and refused to associate himself with the shrill patriotism that was dominant then and later.

Despite the numerous signals that an international storm was brewing signs that observant American writers like Morton Fullerton had been able to decipher ${ }^{8}$ - Eliot himself had no inkling that a world war was in the making. On July 26, 1914, he wrote to his friend Eleanor Hinkley: "I shan't have anything very exciting to narrate this summer; this is as peaceful a life as one could well find" (Eliot 2011, 54). Ironically, just two days later, Archduke Ferdinand was murdered in Sarajevo, and the assassination triggered the successive declarations of war. I survey the timeline of the war's many theaters in order to parallel them with Eliot's experiences.

# II. Parallel Wars 

July 2, 1914. Publication of Blast.
August 4, 1914. England declares war on Germany after the latter invades Belgium.

August 22, 1914. Coming back from a trip to Marburg, Germany, Eliot settles in London and explains to his mother that it was fine to be a citizen of the United States because the Germans did their best to be friendly to the Americans (58).

September 5, 1914. The Battle of the Marne.
September 7, 1914. Eliot tells his brother that it is "more interesting to be in London now than it was to be in Germany" (59). He meets Ezra Pound, who is enthusiastic about Eliot's poems and who agrees to print "Prufrock." Eliot sends a "war poem" to Conrad Aiken that ends with:

What ho! they cry'd, we'll sink your ship!
And so they up and sink'd her.
But the cabin boy was sav'd alive
And bugger'd, in the sphincter. (64)
Eliot adds that the poem had to be rejected because "it paid too great a tribute to the charms of German youth to be acceptable to the English public" (64). On October 5, Eliot, still at Merton College, Oxford, entertains hopes of returning to a German university as a "neutral[]" in the spring (65).

October 19, 1914. First Battle of Ypres. The resulting stalemate leads to a defensive war.

November and December 1914. Eliot finds that "Oxford even at this time is peaceful, always elegiac" (75). Yet he feels "more alive" in London as he "hate[s] university towns"; "Oxford is very pretty, but I don't like to be dead" (8I).

February 1915. Beginning of the Dardanelles campaign when an Anglo-French army attacks Gallipoli (in present-day Turkey). A corps made

up of "Anzac" soldiers from Australia and New Zealand, wearing large Stetson hats instead of helmets, establishes a beachhead, the "Anzac cove." Allied forces attempt to combine ground forces and amphibious naval attacks fail, unlike during the Roman triumph over Carthage at Mylae, in 260 BCE, during the first Punic war, when the Roman boats, equipped with bridges, linked themselves to enemy ships, allowing legionnaires to fight as if they were on solid ground. Echoes of these historical details find their way into The Waste Land.

February 25, 1915. Eliot complains of Oxford and the war: "the War suffocates me," and he adds that he cannot stand the British weather and food (95). London remains the place for excitement and artistic innovation, especially because of the work occurring in the group around Ezra Pound and Wyndham Lewis. In March, Eliot meets Vivien Haigh-Wood at a party organized by Scofield Thayer in Oxford. A powerful, innovative participant, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, is killed in action on June 5, 1915.

May 2, 1915. Jean Verdenal, a French army medical officer, is killed during the Gallipoli campaign, just before he would have turned twenty-five. According to reports, he had spent a night in water up to his waist, helping evacuate wounded soldiers by sea, when he was shot by enemy fire.

June 26, 1915. After three months of courtship, Eliot marries Vivien Haigh-Wood almost secretly, not having mentioned his decision to his parents. Ezra Pound and Bertrand Russell defend Eliot's position in the face of his family's incomprehension.

May and July 2015. Despite the sinking of the Lusitania on May 7, 1915, Eliot travels to America alone on July 24 to give news of his marriage. He returns to England on September 4, 1915. Bertrand Russell, a sort of symbolic father, has helped the couple, and soon becomes Vivien's lover when he understands the sexual incompatibility between his two friends.

July 15, 1915. The second and last issue of Blast is published. This War Number includes Eliot's "Preludes" I to IV and "Rhapsody on a Windy Night."

January 1916. Eliot mentions the death of Jean Verdenal in a letter to Conrad Aiken that also carries the news of his teaching position in a high school, and news of the recurrent illnesses of his wife (137). Despite the strain, his spirits are high: "I am having a wonderful life nevertheless. I have lived through material for a score of long poems, in the last six months" (138).

February 21, 1916. Beginning of the battle of Verdun.

March and June 1916. Eliot sends his dissertation on Bradley's philosophy to Harvard but is prevented from sailing back to defend it. The thesis is accepted in June 1916. Eliot never comes for the examination.

July 1, 1916. Beginning of the battle of the Somme.
August 1916. Eliot explains to Aiken that his wife is mostly suffering from "nerves, complicated by physical ailments" (157). He justifies his decision to stay in England to his father in that "setting the war aside, I have succeeded in what I have undertaken." Yet, he later cannot hide the fact that "When [Vivien] worries she bleeds internally, in a metaphorical sense" (176-7).

March 15, 1917. Tsar Nicholas II abdicates.
March 1917. Eliot begins working at Lloyds Bank as a clerk in the foreign department, earning $£_{2}$ io s. a week, preferring this to teaching schoolchildren. He works on international accounts, which forces him to brush up on his French and Italian, and to study Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, and Spanish. He gives lectures on English literature on Mondays.

April 6, 1917. The United States declares war on Germany.
April and June 1917. Vivien states that she dreads the American declaration of war, fearing that her husband "might have, some day, to fight" (192). Eliot becomes a contributing editor to The Egoist. Eliot explains that he cannot understand "war enthusiasm," and that, from the testimony of those who have returned, like Vivien's brother Maurice, the war is "something very sordid and disagreeable which must be put through" (203). His first book, Prufrock and Other Observations is published, with a dedication to Jean Verdenal, "mort aux Dardanelles."

April 16-17, 1917. The Nivelle offensive is so costly in human lives that rebellions and desertions in the French army begin. These are severely punished by summary executions. On June 7, 1917, the Battle of Messines begins with the biggest and loudest mine explosions ever: nineteen mines explode almost at once, the noise being audible in London and Dublin, killing thousands of German men. Just before, the second army chief of staff, Harington, had declared to the press: "Gentlemen, we may not make history tomorrow, but we shall certainly change the geography." ${ }^{9}$

June 23, 1917. Eliot publishes a letter by his brother-in-law, Maurice Haigh-Wood, which describes the horrors of trench warfare. He quotes Maurice, who mentions "swollen and blackening corpses of hundreds of young men. The appalling stench of rotting carrion," and "Mud like porridge, trenches like shallow and sloping cracks in the porridge - porridge

that stinks in the sun" (205). Maurice adds: "Wounded men lying in the shell holes among the decaying corpses: helpless under the scorching sun and bitter nights, under repeated shelling. Men with bowels dropping out, lungs shot away, with blinded, smashed faces, or limbs blown into space. Men screaming and gibbering." He points out that some people just "shudder" and forget, including "regular" army officers, "jolly good fellows who have never stopped to think in their lives" (205). Eliot will not follow Bertrand Russell's militant pacifism. Russell is helped and accompanied in his courageous activism by Vivien.

November 7, 1917. The Bolsheviks overthrow the Russian government.
July 1917. Eliot had suspected that things might "go to pieces in Russia" (211). In April 1918, he writes that one cannot believe in a "fight for civilisation" because the term has lost most of its meaning (262).

February 16, 1918. Lithuania's Act of Independence, recognizing it as free state.
Later, in The Waste Land Eliot renders a version of Marie Larisch's narration of parts of her life to him in 1911, writing "Bin gar keine Russin, stamm' aus Litauen, echt deutsch" ("I am not Russian, I come from Lithuania, I am a pure German" (I2, my translation). Countess Marie Louise Larisch von Moennich (1858-1940) was the niece and confidante of Empress Elisabeth of Austria. She had acted as a go-between for her cousin, Crown Prince Rudolf, during his affair with Mary Vetsera, a friend of hers. When the scandal broke in 1889 after their death, Marie was shunned by the imperial court. She published her memoir, My Life, in 1913.

July 15, 1918. Second Battle of the Marne.
August to October 1918. Eliot attempts to be enlisted in the U.S. Navy as an intelligence officer or a noncombatant interpreter. The plans fail, and he returns to the bank. In July 1918, Bertrand Russell is sentenced to six months in prison for libel and for being a pacifist.

November II, 1918. The armistice is signed at Compiègne.
In December, Eliot announces that he is exhausted by his dealings with the army and by bouts of influenza. He needs complete mental rest. His father dies on January 7, 1919. Eliot speaks of having experienced a "collapse" in February 1919. Poems is published by the Hogarth Press on May 12, 1919. In May 1919, Vivien makes a firm decision to stop seeing Bertrand Russell.

February 14, 1919. Beginning of the Polish-Soviet War, which lasts until March 1921. Soviet Russia and Soviet Ukraine fight against the Second

Polish Republic and the Ukrainian People's Republic. This is widely seen as an attempt by the Soviet regime to spread the revolution westward.

The first draft of The Waste Land mentions "hooded hordes swarming / ... Over Polish plains," which is crossed out and changed to "endless plains" (Eliot 1971, 73-5, lines 48-9).

June 28, 1919. The Treaty of Versailles is signed and is never ratified by the United States.

On July 2, 1919, Eliot explains to his brother why he will stay in London: he finds it hard to blend in, but on the whole agrees that life there is more civilized, exciting, and also dangerous: "London is something one has to fight very hard in, in order to survive" (Eliot 2011, 370). In August, Eliot takes a walking tour in the south of France with Pound and his health is much better. The last issue of The Egoist is published in December 1919, with the second installment of "Tradition and the Individual Talent." On December 18, 1919, Eliot criticizes the American delays to a global peace, pointing out the starvation of the Viennese population: "I suppose Americans realise now what a fiasco the reorganisation of nationalities has been: the 'Balkanisation' of Europe" (425). He then sorts out prewar debts between the bank and Germany, which gives him an opportunity to study the effects of the Peace Treaty, with the knotty issue of war reparations to be paid by the German state.

January 20, 1920. According to the Treaty of Versailles, the Danzig (or Polish) corridor is established, giving Poland access to the Baltic Sea, dissolving the former German province of West Prussia.

1920. "Gerontion" presents "History" as having "many cunning passages, contrived corridors" (34), which alludes to the new map of Europe, and to the complicated "schemes" of the victorious Allies.

# III. Demobilization as Demoralization 

I have focused on the war years because we know a lot about the series of mental collapses and psychosomatic depressions that Eliot experienced in 1921 - leading to his stay at Margate and to the cure in Lausanne with Dr. Vittoz - and not enough about the war years, even though it seems obvious that The Waste Land is a response to this dramatic period. In the same way Eliot had been told that the demobilization process had been a failure in the United States, which accounted for the American public opinion's swing against Wilson's generous but misguided international politics, his poem dramatizes the difficulty of returning to a "normal" life after the

immense sacrifices made in the name of "saving civilization." We see this in the dialogue of "A Game of Chess" when Lil is reproached for not knowing how to keep her looks - her recently "demobbed" husband will want to enjoy himself and will be excused for having a roving eye:
and think of poor Albert,
He's been in the army four years, he wants a good time, And if you don't give it him, there's others will, I said. (147-9)

However, we soon learn via Tiresias that the postwar, newly found sexual freedom leads to mechanical and meaningless lovemaking. The typist is only glad that sexual congress can be dispatched quickly; the young man carbuncular does not even notice her indifference. Given this landscape of barrenness (Lil's problems come from her having aborted with dubious pills) and sexual apathy, it may come as a surprise that, according to the classical tradition synthesized by Ovid's Metamorphoses, Tiresias's main teachings to the gods were to ascertain that female orgasms are stronger than men's. It is as if the demobilization has triggered a general demoralization, which would be marked by a loss of sensual appetite and a vanishing of desire.

Such a moral and sexual detumescence cannot be blamed on the fact that Eliot felt guilty for not having seen combat. Eliot may partly be identified with Gerontion, who readily admits his absence from the battlefield:

I was neither at the hot gates
Nor fought in the warm rain
Nor knee deep in the salt marsh, heaving a cutlass, Bitten by flies, fought. (3-6)

This passage is often read as an echo of Jean Verdenal's death near Gallipoli. Although Eliot's friendship with Verdenal may have been asexual, Eliot's French friend conveyed a sense of delight and enjoyment of life's simple pleasures. These pleasures seem to have vanished after the Great War. "Gerontion," the poem that was to serve as an introduction to The Waste Land, lists other possible sources of enjoyment, although they appear sterile. The "chilled delirium" (62) of "Gerontion" is related to a "wilderness of mirrors" ( 65 , emphasis added), a startling image that conceals an allusion to the Galerie des Glaces at Versailles, the huge hall where the international treaty was signed on June 28, 1919. Hence, the loss of enjoyment and the aphanisis (the term coined by Ernest Jones in 1927 to denote the disappearance of sexual desire), marking a new sexual morality, seem predicated on the demoralization of the peace period rather than on war itself.

This might be confirmed by a letter to Eleanor Hinkley from 1917 in which Eliot rehearses his absence from combat while stressing that he waged

his other war - his sexual tug of war with Bertrand Russell and Vivien. Eleanor speaks of America as if life went on as usual, which was not the case for Eliot, who writes:

Life moves so rapidly over here that one never hears twice of the same person as being in the same place or doing quite the same thing. It is either killed or wounded, or fever, or going to gaol, or being let out of gaol, or being tried, or summoned before a tribunal of some kind. I have been living in one of Dostoevsky's novels, you see, not in one of Jane Austen's. If I have not seen the battlefield, I have seen other strange things, and I have signed a cheque for $£ 200,000$ while bombs fell about me. I have dined with a princess and with a man who expected two years hard labour; and it all seems like a dream. The most real thing was a little dance we went to a few days ago, something like yours used to be, in a studio with a gramophone. (210)

This reveals a curious loss of reality that the poet seems to have experienced because of the war. The small pleasures like listening to the gramophone and dancing to its tunes can ward off for a moment the sexual and psychic upheavals caused by a disastrous marriage. Eliot is alluding here to Bertrand Russell, who had avoided imprisonment in 1917 but would not be so lucky in 1918. The Great War thus generated a double unreality: the unreality of the unspeakably traumatic scenes described by Maurice Haigh-Wood in the trenches and the unreality of everyday life in London. Such a feeling of unreality affected many people, especially shell-shocked soldiers sheltered from an unbelievable massacre by self-induced hysteria or psychosis.

At the same time, it seems that Eliot experienced life more deeply and felt more alive than before. He had gauged life in all its horror because he experienced pain, excess, and ecstasy fully. In fact, he was granted what he was asking for before the war, as we see in a letter to Conrad Aiken from July 1914, in which he complains that he "lack[s] inspiration" and "feel[s] very constipated intellectually" (47). He adds: "Some people say that pain is necessary ('they learn in suffering' etc).... what is necessary is a certain kind (could one but catch it!) of tranquility, and sometimes pain does bring it. A kind of tranquility which Dostoievsky [sic] must <on second thoughts I delete the line> have known when he was writing his masterpieces at top-speed to keep from starving" (47). Six days later, as in guise of an illustration, Eliot appends to another letter several poems, including "The Love Song of St Sebastian" in which he dwells on sadomasochistic fantasies: the speaker flogs himself till he bleeds, then he strangles a woman (5I). The trope of pathos mathos (suffering brings knowledge) thus applies to a prewar poet who dimly senses that he has not

experienced life: he feels that he is a virgin not only in sexual matters but also in his apprehension of reality.

In the letter to Eleanor Hinkley from July of 1917, Eliot refers to novels, not to poetry or tragedy, in order to get a grip on the unthinkable reality of the war. The Great War imposes a paradigm shift in the choice of literary examples - if before the war, life was like a Jane Austen novel, during the war it has turned into a Dostoevsky novel. He is alluding to the fact that he had acted in "An Afternoon with Mr. Woodhouse," a sketch based on Jane Austen's life that Eleanor had organized at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1913, but the reference to Austen is apt: it captures the prewar world of young men and women who aim at making a good marriage. Dostoevsky's novels bring in a different mode of being, with excesses of hysteria well summarized by Bertrand Russell, who knew that Vivien Eliot loved reading the Russian novelist. Russell confides to Ottoline Morrell that Vivien can be cruel facing her husband: "It is a Dostoevsky type of cruelty.... She is a person who lives on a knife edge, \& will end as a criminal or a saint - I don't know which yet." ${ }^{10}$ Russell's cliché of a "Russian" personality seems to characterize Vivien, whom he saw as a bipolar seducer, capable of murdering either her husband or her lover, in the hope of being punished or killed herself.

The "Russian" psychology Russell understood to be exemplified by Dostoevsky's characters, presenting a combination of hysteria and sadomasochism, also appears in the first draft of the "Fresca" section in the first draft of The Waste Land:

The Scandinavians bemused her wits,
The Russians thrilled her to hysteric fits. (Eliot 1971, 27, lines 58-9)
Sigmund Freud, who wrote a psychobiography of Dostoevsky in 1928, mentions in "The Economic Problem of Masochism" people who are prone to "sinful acts" because these actions will unleash reproaches from their sadistic conscience - which he claims "is exemplified in so many Russian character-types." ${ }^{11}$ Eliot provides a similar diagnosis in his "London Letter" published in The Dial in September 1922. He mentions that "Dostoevsky had the gift, a sign of genius in itself, for utilizing his weaknesses; so that epilepsy and hysteria cease to be the defects of an individual and become as a fundamental weakness can, given the ability to face it and study it - the entrance to a genuine and personal universe." ${ }^{12} \mathrm{He}$ had just read Hermann Hesse's perceptive analysis in the essay "The Brothers Karamazov or The Downfall of Europe," whose ending is quoted in German in the Notes to The Waste Land: "Schon ist halb Europa, schon ist zumindest der halbe Osten Europas auf dem Wege zum Chaos, fährt betrunken im heiligen Wahn am Abgrund entlang und singt dazu, singt betrunken und hymnisch wie

Dmitri Karamasoff sang. Ueber diese Lieder lacht der Bürger beleidigt, der Heilige und Seher hört sie mit Tränen" (Note 366-76).

In this impassioned meditation written in 1919, Hesse links Friedrich Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, noting that both were able to use their diseases creatively. The convulsions of the Karamazov family, leading to the murder of a demented father, allegorize the downfall of Europe. The fate of Dmitri, the immoralist with an artist's sensitivity, who acts according to the promptings of his inner voice, points to a possible renewal. This renewal would entail leaving behind the old Christian morality and engaging with a wisdom from Asia. ${ }^{13}$ According to Hesse, Dostoevsky calls for an "Asian ideal" of mystical sainthood that would avoid the dichotomies of "good" and "evil" (126) since Asia is the true mother of Europe, and the only way one can avoid a return to the catastrophic conditions that precipitated a world war is to bypass ethics and understand the need for a new sainthood. Yet Hesse's essay has too often been reduced to a condemnation of the Soviet Revolution. Indeed, the essay ends with the passage that is quoted by Eliot: "Soon half of Europe, at least half of Eastern Europe, is on the road to chaos, reeling into the abyss in a state of drunken delirium, singing drunken hymns as Dmitri Karamazov did. These songs are heard with wounded laughter by the bourgeois, and with tears by the saint and the seer" (139-40, my translation). In fact, Hesse is not so much damning the Russian Revolution as he is condemning the bourgeois complacency shown by Western Europeans. Both Dostoevsky and the Russian revolutionaries suffer from "hysteria," he argues (139), but such hysteria can be productive, since it is linked with artistic creation and mystical visions. On the other hand, an innocent Dmitri Karamazov will be convicted for a murder he has not committed. Here, as Hesse argues, Dostoevsky accuses the enraged and prejudiced bourgeois, who take Dmitri's drunken singing for a confession, as we see in book 12 of The Brothers Karamazov (138).

Hesse's reading of Dostoevsky agrees with Eliot's, in that they see the Russian novelist as a prophet of doom and also a renovator of values. The general upheaval of all values, to use Nietzsche's famous phrase of Umwertung aller Werte, can also lead to a paradoxical reawakening of spirituality. Like Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, Hesse and Eliot want to bypass the binary logics opposing reason and feeling that have plagued European rationalism since the Enlightenment. This attempt to go beyond the duality of "normal" and "pathological" has political implications. Thus Hesse's thinking follows the model provided by a Catholic thinker of politics, Carl Schmitt, who was at the time rethinking the religious or mystical foundation of politics. Schmitt attempted to make sense of a situation of "exception" caused by war. We can note that The Waste Land is contemporary to the publication of Carl Schmitt's Political Theology, a book beginning with

the famous definition "Sovereign is he who decides on the exception." ${ }^{14}$ Like Valéry, in "La crise de l'esprit," which I have already quoted, Schmitt thinks beyond the facile dichotomy of order and chaos. Here is Schmitt: "What characterizes an exception is principally unlimited authority, which means the suspension of the entire existing order. In such a situation it is clear that the state remains, whereas law recedes. Because the exception is different from anarchy and chaos, order in the juristic sense still prevails even if it is not of the ordinary kind" (12). Here is Valéry, comparing the European man of 1919 to Hamlet, but having too many skulls to meditate on: "Our European Hamlet looks at millions of specters.... He thinks of the tedium of rehearsing the past, and of the madness of always innovating. He staggers between two abysses, for two dangers constantly threaten the world: order and disorder" (993). Eliot's thought should not be oversimplified into an opposition between order and chaos.

A last binary that Eliot was trying to overcome - both in The Waste Land and in his general thinking - was that of the strict couple of defeat and victory, which explains why his depression came to him not during the war, but after. By a relatively common paradox, the victory of the Allies was also a new debacle. The war had provided the "exception," but without the exception, one would fall back to the impossible choice of either order or chaos. It is such a choice that led to Eliot's moral collapse. This moral collapse was something he had felt in his old role model, Jules Laforgue, and to which he confessed in 1921, in "The Metaphysical Poets," when Eliot quotes one of Laforgue's Last Verses to illustrate the way Laforgue can be obscure, difficult, allusive, indirect, all this "in order to force, to dislocate if necessary, language into his meaning." ${ }^{15}$ Then Eliot quotes the first stanza from poem X of Last Verses, beginning "O geraniums diaphanes" in which the key statement is the reiteration of "débâcles nuptiales!" Mysterious geraniums have been at war ("guerroyeurs") while people have waited in vain for the "grands soirs" of a social revolution, and now are stuck in the miserable litany of "transfusions, reprisals, churchings, compresses and the eternal potion" (7-8). The dismal view of sexuality frames the speaker's revulsion at the thought of "Nuptial debacles! Nuptial debacles!" (ro). The sexual fiasco of a bad marriage would be intolerable in times of peace, a peace called up by the ending of Laforgue's poem that Eliot does not quote. There, Laforgue includes one exception to the rule of disastrous sexual encounters when he mentions the possibility of sexual bliss. Laforgue was not to enjoy this bliss long, since he died one year after his marriage. But Eliot did not die, not visibly, at least.

The apparent victory of the Allies also allowed Eliot to probe further débâcles that lay in store. The term was used regularly for the French defeat of 1870-I. Emile Zola used it in La débâcle, a historical novel about the

Franco-Prussian war of 1870-1, which somehow explained the Great War, just as 1919 would explain 1939. The serious task was to inch toward redemption, as Franz Rosenzweig argues in The Star of Redemption. The war's aftermath had left too many loaded nationalisms or tricky Danzig corridors ready to explode, all the while contributing baffling instances of Hegel's "cunning of reason."

After such knowledge, what forgiveness? Think now
History has many cunning passages, contrived corridors
And issues, deceives with whispering ambitions,
Guides us by vanities....
These tears are shaken from the wrath-bearing tree. ("Gerontion" 33-47)
These urgent admonitions sound less a "rappel à l'ordre" (as Ezra Pound, Jean Cocteau, and Andre Gide implied at a time when they wanted to return to a new classicism) than a "reveille," although not from a military bugle, but with words. The new focus is on awakening, as Walter Benjamin argues in his Arcades Project. We can no longer sleep, we have to wake up from the four-year trance of "sleepwalkers" going unscathed through mined terrain. ${ }^{16}$ Then, even if we have learned that the earth is a small sphere, and that it has become a comfortable place to inhabit, we should try to redeem the times.

As we have seen, the task of redeeming the times entails overcoming the simple dualism opposing order and chaos. This accounts for the ambiguity of an often-quoted line from the end of The Waste Land: "These fragments I have shored against my ruins" (430). We know from the drafts that Eliot had initially written "These fragments I have spelt into my ruins" and then, without even crossing out the verb, added above the line: "shored against" (Eliot 1971, 8I, line II4). The two verbs are not identical; the meaning of the first version can be construed as: "My poem made up of fragments, The Waste Land, is spelling, naming, or writing words into my ruins." The revision adds the meaning of propping up, supporting, as if the poetic fragments were called upon to defend the poet against an impending ruin. In the first concept, the poet's task is to write with a didactic intention so as to mobilize and make new "other withered stumps of time" (IO4), with the poem itself as another beautiful ruin, capable of surviving by itself among all the other ruins left by the war. In the second concept, the poem is a rampart of words, a tentative construction with prosthetic props which will help the poet survive after having witnessed the destruction, material and moral, brought about by European madness. However, whether these ruins are construed as positive or negative, what stands out is the strong syntax balancing the deictic "these" - which testifies to the objective existence

of the poem - and the possessive "my": even if there are ruins, they have become my own ruins.

# NOTES 

I First draft version of a black-ink manuscript used near the end of The Waste Land. T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 112-13.
2 Paul Valéry, "La crise de l'esprit," Oeuvres I (Paris: Pléiade, 1965), 988.
3 Eliot, The Waste Land, in Collected Poems: 1909-1962 (London: Faber and Faber, 1963), 373-6. Subsequent references to The Waste Land will be cited parenthetically by line number.
4 Valéry, "La crise de l'esprit," 992, 996.
5 Mary Hutchinson, "War," The Egoist 4, no. II (1917): 169-72.
6 See Vivien Eliot's letter to Mary Hutchinson, [September 8?, 1917], in Eliot, The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 215. Subsequent letters will be cited parenthetically.
7 The best account of Kafka's war of attrition against marriage is in Frederick Karl's Franz Kafka, Representative Man: Prague, Germans, Jews and the Crisis of Modernism (New York: Fromm International Publishing Corporation, 1993), 308-419.
8 See Morton Fullerton, Problems of Power (New York: Scribner's Sons, 1913). I have analyzed this book in 1913: The Cradle of Modernism (Oxford: Blackwell, 2007), II-I2.

9 For a detailed account of the entire military operation, see Alexander Turner, Messines 1917: The Zenith of Siege Warfare (Oxford: Osprey, 2010).
Io Bertrand Russell's Autobiography, as quoted in Seymour-Jones, 129.
II Sigmund Freud, "The Economic Problem of Masochism," General Psychological Theory, ed. Philip Rieff (1924; New York: Macmillan, 1963), 200.
I2 Eliot, "London Letter: The Novel," The Dial 73 no. 3 (1922): 33 I.
13 I am summarizing the essay in Hermann Hesse, Sämtliche Werke, Band I8, Die Welt im Buch, III, Rezensionen und Aufsätze 1917-1925, trans. Stephen Hudson (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Presse: 2002), 125-40. The essay was published, in condensed form, in The Dial 72 no. 6 (1922): 607-18.
14 Carl Schmitt, Political Theology, trans. George Schwab (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 5.
15 Eliot, The Annotated Waste Land with Eliot's Contemporary Prose, ed. Lawrence Rainey (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2005), 199.
16 I am alluding to two books that, whether they work via fiction or as historical documentation, imply that when Europe let itself be engulfed in total war it was a sort of collective trance or "sleepwalking": Christopher Clark, The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914 (London: Penguin, 2013); Hermann Broch, The Sleepwalkers, trans. Willa and Edwin Muir (1947; New York: Random House, 1996).
