# 2 

SPENCER MORRISON

## Geographies of Space: Mapping and Reading the Cityscape

T. S. Eliot first toured London with the help of a Baedeker travel guide (London and Its Environs, published in 1908); in a letter of April 26, 191 I he describes "produc[ing] a map" (likely his Baedeker's) before "an austere Englishman" while charting his route. ${ }^{1}$ A decade later, ensconced in London as an (arguably) austere resident, and in the process of composing The Waste Land, Eliot voices in The Dial his exhilaration at taking in Igor Stravinsky's Sacre du Printemps: "[the music] did seem to transform the rhythm of the steppes into the scream of the motor horn, the rattle of machinery, the grind of wheels, the beating of iron and steel, the roar of the underground railway, and the other barbaric cries of modern life." ${ }^{2}$ Evoking a putative primitivism ("the rhythm of the steppes," "barbaric") in the clangor of urban modernity, Stravinsky's music acts for Eliot as an alternative Baedeker, indexing urban experience in a form more textured than tourist guides or city maps that present abstract networks of streets and buildings. ${ }^{3}$ Such an awareness of mapping's pliability as a representational mode - an awareness that mapping can be carried out not only by government administrators but also by citizens who conjure their own personal orderings of city space - infuses The Waste Land, where, near the poem's end, the speaker asks, "Shall I at least set my lands in order?" ${ }^{4}$ This question announces the possibility of a future spatial order that repairs the present's fragmentation, with the phrase "set ... in order" enunciating an impulse not just cartographic but governmental.

Yet the interrogative form in which this possibility arises also subtly undercuts governmental mapping: the word "Shall" casts doubt upon the ethics and viability of the project of spatial ordering. The Waste Land, often read as "the text of urban disaffection in modernist poetry par excellence," both embodies and questions new ways of ordering, mapping, and artistically governing urban experience, meditating on the prospects for new spatial orders commensurate to the material upheavals of modern city

life. ${ }^{5}$ Just as Ezra Pound, revising Shelley, claimed that poets should be considered acknowledged legislators, The Waste Land casts attention on the very processes of urban ordering and governing that it artistically enacts, grounding its reflections on modernity in London's built form, material infrastructure, and urban administration. That is to say, The Waste Land's poetic ordering of city life accentuates and illuminates facets of urban experience inflected by governmental processes. It does so by presenting a pervasive sense of unreality engendered in part by the dynamics of imperialism and mass capitalism that elide distances between disparate geographic spaces and historical periods, though also by psychic and ontological fragmentation that are aligned in the poem with cycles of material ruin and reconstruction and catalyzed by municipally endorsed urban renewal. Beyond such a sense of unreality, we can see The Waste Land's governmental inflections in the poem's representation of new forms of collective psychology produced by the unprecedented crowding of modern city life; we also see a heightened awareness of systems of energy generation and waste removal, congruent with massive upheavals in urban infrastructure in Eliot's time. Above all, The Waste Land's rendering of urban modernity both depicts and performs what economist Joseph Schumpeter terms "creative destruction" - the unceasing cycles of development, destruction, and redevelopment that fuel wealth creation in capitalist societies. Eliot's poem bears the traces of an urban order beholden to and materialized by such cycles, even as it rehearses and represents such cycles itself, endowing its poetic form with distinctly governmental, legislative drives.

The poem's cartographic imagination orders city space so as to anchor its presentation of urban experience within specific London sites while nevertheless rendering those sites "Unreal" (376). As many readers have noted, sites and streets familiar to Eliot populate The Waste Land: the poem's description of an anonymous crowd crossing London Bridge into the financial district "To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours" (67) mirrors Eliot's own commute to his position at Lloyds Bank, located behind Saint Mary Woolnoth Church, on Lombard Street. Indeed, the London streets mentioned in The Waste Land all emanate from Lombard Street, while locatable neighborhoods like Highbury, and Thames-side locales like Richmond and Kew, and the tube station of Moorgate (the closest stop to Lloyds Bank) disclose a finely grained sense of place. However, as any reader of The Waste Land can attest, these place names, evocative of official city maps, unmoor themselves from a sense of stable emplacement, engulfed by a phantasmagoric unreality that suffuses not just London but modern urban experience as such:

Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal (373-6)
Perhaps the central question for any reader of the poem's engagement with city life thus becomes: in what does The Waste Land's urban unreality and its expression of alternative modes of urban mapping and experience inhere? Whatever our answers, what seems inescapable is a recognition that The Waste Land's urban unreality manifests itself in and through psychological, social, economic, and cultural aspects of urban modernity tied intimately not only to built city space but to the poem's own formal strategies. That is to say, "unreality" embraces not just the poem's representations of urbanity but also its very representational strategies, its poetic form.

The Waste Land's technique of figuring Eliot's London through the frames of desert and jungle geographies, Eastern and Western spiritual traditions, and historical and literary allusions, renders the process of reading city space also one of archaeology. On the one hand, superimposed upon the poem's chartable London place-names, these strata situate the city within more expansive senses of time and place than simply the London of 1922. On the other, they incorporate The Waste Land's named city sites within a sweeping vision of spiritual and cultural decay, thereby acting as vehicles for what critical geographer Henri Lefebvre calls "representational space" - "space which the imagination seeks to change and appropriate." ${ }^{6}$ Thus, for instance, pervasive allusions to ancient mythology and ritual, as well as what Eleanor Cook has identified as The Waste Land's invocation of ancient Roman imperial geography, immerse the poem's urban form and culture within not just a cyclical vision of history, but a cyclical vision that is characterized by the rises and falls conventionally ascribed to empires across time. As Cook notes, "London in 1922 was still the center of an empire," and the poem's positioning of London at the end of a list of failed imperial centers (Jerusalem, Athens, Alexandria, Vienna) allows it to shadow its textual city with the prospect of collapse. ${ }^{7}$ Such historical resonances plunge The Waste Land's named places within an apocalyptic vision rooted in cyclical temporality. The Waste Land in this way adds granulation to these represented sites by locating them within a globe-spanning imperial apparatus. However, the poem's invocation of cyclical imperial histories simultaneously works against this granulating current, resisting any tendency toward urban particularity by redirecting attention to imperial apparatuses as such, abstracted from London's specific material form. The past's unceasing presence in The Waste Land's London in this way 26

creates a tension between materiality and abstraction, rendering the urban "real" not quite so.

However, it is not just techniques of literary-historical superimposition and allusion that generate a sense of unreality in Eliot's London; what Michel de Certeau might call The Waste Land's spatial story - its processes of "travers[ing] and organiz[ing] places," ${ }^{8}$ its sequencing of distinct spaces constructs implicit comparisons between London and the diverse geographies (desert, alpine, and jungle) juxtaposed against it. Thrusting together spatially distant locales, The Waste Land encodes in its poetic form a geographic reach that recalls both London's global imperial system and a heightened sense of mobility in Eliot's time enabled by new modes of travel. These distinct spaces, brought into relations of contiguity by the poem's spatial story, assume also relations of metonymy, their proximity on the page conjuring previously unseen ligatures between them, shared qualities that facilitate comparisons through the prism of metaphor. While processes of literary and historical allusion render London a palimpsest striated by urban cultures across time, The Waste Land's collage-like juxtaposition of spaces that are geographically distinct but temporally simultaneous enacts a subtly different type of superimposition: the first is diachronic, the second synchronic.

Take, for instance, The Waste Land's desert. Across the poem shared words and images bind this space to the city, inviting comparison: the "hooded hordes swarming" (368) across the desert recall in their chilling uniformity the crowd of virtual automatons that flows over London Bridge in "The Burial of the Dead;" the "roots that clutch" (19) in the desert anticipate the leaves that "Clutch" (174) the Thames's bank; above the mantel of the house described in "A Game of Chess" lies an image of a nightingale who "Fill[s] all the desert with inviolable voice" (ror). While such figural echoes bind London to a host of other spaces across the poem, The Waste Land's desert forcefully evokes a stoniness - a spiritual and cultural emptiness - within urban modernity, even as it locates the source of pervasive urban stoniness in a severance of city experience from the natural landscape. Containing "stony rubbish" (20), this desert's sheer squalor gives to desert life a sense of urgent material deprivation lacking in London, revealing another source of urban unreality in the very material commodities that fill city life, the littered forms of which clog the Thames. The aridity of The Waste Land's desert thus transmutes itself, by way of the poem's spatial story, into a cultural and spiritual aridity within city life produced by material decadence.

However, more than the desert's aridity is figuratively imputed to The Waste Land's London, a city that itself lacks vivifying water, its river polluted. As implied by their shared images of fearfully heteronomous, deindividualized collective life (crowds and hordes), the desert and the city foster

similar psychological states in their respective inhabitants. Just as the poem's urbanites suffer psychological isolation, "We think of the key, each in his prison" (413), so the animalistic desert figures seem unable to overcome psychological isolation: the speaker entreats an imagined interlocutor to perceive something other than "Your shadow at morning striding behind you / Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you" (suggesting that desert dwellers cannot perceive a world beyond the shadow, or prison, of selfhood) (28-9). Indeed, the poem's insinuation of a virtually primordial link between landscapes of stony rubbish and the selfhoods of those who inhabit them - this landscape's "red rock" (25) echoes the "red sullen faces [that] sneer and snarl" (344) in "What the Thunder Said" - suggests a broader relationship between subjectivity and space within The Waste Land as a whole, in not only its wilderness zones but its urban ones. For instance, the montage of urban images that open "What the Thunder Said" - such as that of "Prison and palace and reverberation" (326) - includes one of "torchlight red on sweaty faces" (322), situating desert-like redness on faces of urbanites, the sweat on their face representing bodily waste redolent of the desert's strewn waste, its "stony rubbish." Moreover, the unintelligible "snarl[s]" (344) heard in The Waste Land's wilderness regions function as a figurative limit case to the decayed public sphere of its urban zones, this decay signaled by the largely trivial conversations that transpire in the London scenes. Desert, alpine, and jungle geographies in The Waste Land thus function as multivalent symbols in the poem's representation of urbanism: these symbols do not simply bind urbanity to wilderness zones by foregrounding shared geographical or material features, nor do they simply link these spaces by reference to common psychological states; rather, these figurative connections rely upon, and elaborate, intricate links between material space and subjectivity itself.

In this vein, the spatial trope most crucial in binding city to wilderness, built form to subjectivity, is that of the ruin, a trope intimately tied in the poem to processes of urban ordering and governance. Throughout The Waste Land the figure of the ruin functions as both spatial site and spatial process, as both noun and verb, subtending and reconciling the poem's content and form. In the poem's closing stanza we find the rich ambiguity ruins assume:

I sat upon the shore
Fishing, with the arid plain behind me
Shall I at least set my lands in order?
London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down ...
Le Prince d'Aquitaine à la tour abolie
These fragments I have shored against my ruins (423-30)

At the level of built urban form, the singsong London Bridge refrain of line 426 images forth the ruin of the very bridge traversed by city crowds in "The Burial of the Dead," evoking a broader sense of urban ruin echoed in the phrase "tour abolie" (429), as well as in the "Falling towers" (373) that introduce the poem's list of failed imperial centers, ending in London. Beyond this passage, earlier references to the destroyed ancient city of Carthage, as well as to the Battle of "Mylae" (70) (part of the Punic Wars that resulted in the sack of Carthage in 146 BC), confer upon The Waste Land's ruin imagery the markings of historical cyclicality discussed in this chapter. However, a different type of cyclicality also infuses The Waste Land's urban ruins: as scholars of modern culture such as Marshall Berman have argued, cycles of rapid spatial annihilation and reconstruction - that is, of Schumpeter's "creative destruction" - uniquely inflect modern experience, with forces of mass capitalism and technological innovation reshaping lived geography as never before. The concerns of "profit and loss" (314) that preoccupy Phlebas the Phoenician, Mr. Eugenides, and modern capitalism more generally produce an economic need for continual material consumption and renewal. This economic need in turn necessitates the unending destruction and rebuilding of the urban fabric - a spectral cyclicality captured by Karl Marx's famous phrase "all that is solid melts into air,"9 a loss of solidity that bolsters a sense of unreality in the poem's city space. The Waste Land's urban ruins thus lie at the intersection of two types of cycles: first, transhistorical cycles of imperial collapse; and second, cycles of creative destruction historically specific to modern capitalism.

We can think, then, of The Waste Land as a poem of modern ruin-gazing, where the act of seeing ruins - characteristically understood as an act that elicits both terror and pleasure in the viewer - transpires in a literary form attentive to the new speed of urban destruction. An awareness of the instantaneity of modern forms of ruination inflects The Waste Land's ruin-gazing: whereas earlier Baroque and Romantic traditions of ruin-gazing saw and prized in ruins "natural ... processes of decay over long periods of time," Nick Yablon notes that representations of ruins in modern urban sites typically register an unprecedented suddenness inhering in late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century processes of destruction. ${ }^{10}$ In this new, modern mode of ruin-gazing, ruins most commonly arise from either wartime destruction (evoked by The Waste Land's allusion to Mylae) or "equally violent forces unleashed by the internal contradictions of capitalist urbanization" (Yablon 14). The montage-like catalog of ruined imperial centers (directly preceded by the image of "falling towers") captures a speed unique to forms of ruination in modernity; as such poetic form echoes and conveys how swiftly the buildings of urban modernity can be reduced to rubble. The material forces

and modes of urban change in modernity thus shape the aesthetic act of ruin-gazing offered to The Waste Land's readers.

However, the semantic and figural density of ruins exceeds mere images of material annihilation in The Waste Land: as the speaker notes, "These fragments I have shored against my ruins" (430; my italics). Ruination here becomes a psychic, subjective property, not just a spatial one - the speaker's very selfhood assumes the shape and qualities of ruins, girded by the semantically ambiguous "fragments" (430) shored against it. Fragments, of course, constitute the very disordered form designated by the term ruins, allowing us to fuse imaginatively the shored fragments described in this line with the speaker's own subjectivity. In so doing, we connect material ruin with The Waste Land's poetic form, since fragmentation aptly describes a central literary strategy of the poem. In this closing stanza of The Waste Land, the term "fragments" designates the disjointed quotations immediately preceding line 430 as well as the broader poem itself, as the speaker, sitting by clean water at poem's end, surveys the geographical and literary landscapes traversed in reaching this final site. The fragmentation that befalls ruined buildings manifests itself poetically in The Waste Land's techniques of disorienting montage, collage, and quotation: if we readers "know only / A heap of broken images" (2I-2) when encountering this poem, sensing that we can "connect / Nothing with nothing" (30I-2), our very reading of The Waste Land's textual fragments resembles the act of sifting through material shards amid urban ruin. Moreover, any provisional meaning formed in our textual encounter with the poem becomes an act of reconstruction analogous to urban rebuilding. That the speaker shores these fragments against his or her own subjective ruins recalls the fact that the speaker sits "upon the shore / Fishing" (423-4) in this verse paragraph; this allows us in turn to imagine the speaker's ruined subjectivity as a fluid river structured (and brought into being) by The Waste Land's textual fragments, which collectively form a shore that banks the riverine, ruinous flow. Indeed, our act of reading The Waste Land itself, our provisional ordering of its textual fragments, becomes an act of shoring analogous to the speaker's: through our readerly processes of meaning-making, we give tentative shape to The Waste Land's fragments, thereby imparting a frail, imperfect order to the ruinous text.

Conceiving of The Waste Land as itself a ruin analogous to the material environment and psychological states of urban modernity illuminates also how the ruinous urbanity it depicts inflects its treatment of time. As Tim Edensor writes, "there is an excess of meaning in the remains [of the ruin]: a plenitude of fragmented stories, elisions, fantasies, inexplicable objects and possible events which present a history that can begin and end anywhere." ${ }^{11}$

Such referential excess allows urban ruins to invoke multiple and fragmented pasts while simultaneously gesturing to indeterminate possible futures, leaving the ruin a figure that suggests both a prior (lost) order that has fallen into ruin and a potentially utopian future (an order restored atop the ruin's rubble). And it is just this fraught temporality of the ruin - a site that conjures both past and future amid the decay of the present - that inaugurates The Waste Land through its opening geographical image. "The Burial of the Dead" introduces us to a "dead land" (2) that "mix[es] / Memory and desire" (2-3): if we read this landscape as oriented simultaneously toward the past (through memory, which peers backward) and the future (through desire, which strives toward an object yet to be attained), the conflicting temporal drives of the poem's world come to replicate the complex temporalities of ruins themselves. The poem's material cityscape, threatened by destruction, thus figures forth broader temporal tensions in The Waste Land as a whole. Situated directly before The Waste Land's first image of urbanity (Munich's Hofgarten of line io), this "dead land" represents a site of both generation ("breeding / Lilacs," I-2) and loss ("forgetful snow," 6). In this way, the land instantiates temporal and spatial dynamics of upheaval that structure our readerly introduction to the poem's city space only lines later, as we are ushered into Munich, appropriately enough, by way of disjointed, collage-like quotation in a foreign language ("Bin gar keine Russin, stamm' aus Litauen, echt deutsch," I2).

In understanding The Waste Land as a text that concerns - and formally enacts - new ways of ordering, mapping, and governing modern city experience, images of ruin then serve as figurative hinges for potentially utopian restructurings of modern urbanity; the utopian potential of such restructuring discloses once more how the ruinous poem routes its urban imagination through legislative and governmental concerns. Indeed, the ruin's fragments, their disorder rendering ambiguous the shape of any future reconstruction, "resonate with a utopian longing for some kind of apotheosis" for many theorists and viewers of modern ruin. ${ }^{12}$ Such an impulse for potentially revolutionary reconstruction - not only spatial reconstruction but cultural, social, and governmental - encrypts itself within The Waste Land's iconic images of urban apocalypse in "What the Thunder Said," producing an awareness of how ruination works not just as textual strategy but also as governmental process. To this end, it is noteworthy that immediately before the image of "Falling towers" (373) that ushers in The Waste Land's montage of collapsed imperial centers, we encounter the lines, "What is the city over the mountains / Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air" (37I-2). While this indeterminate "city over the mountains" evokes cities of myth and legend, channeling in its lack of specificity The Waste Land's preoccupation

with abstract urban form as such, the term "reforms" used to describe its destruction carries administrative, governmental connotations that suggest political upheaval. The potential violence of such upheaval reveals itself in the images of "Cracks" and "bursts in the violet air" that attend the urban "reforms" described, the air's "violet" color sonically evoking a violent cataclysm. The political upheaval framed in these lines echoes earlier images of potentially revolutionary violence in "What the Thunder Said" such as "The shouting and the crying / Prison and palace and reverberation" (325-6). Indexing a tumult that swamps central buildings of political power (the palace and prison), these textual fragments install in The Waste Land's ruinous, deadened urban space a latent power of revolutionary renewal.

While "What the Thunder Said" clearly posits a wrathful divinity of thunderous voice as the primary instrument of ruin and possible renewal, the lines cited in the preceding verse paragraph posit a second potential instrument of revolutionary urban destruction and rebuilding: unruly urban crowds. After all, the "shouting and the crying" (325) that accompanies urban "reverberation" (326) recalls the cacophony emitted by crowds; moreover, the "hooded hordes swarming / Over endless plains" (368-9) seem causally linked to the "Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air" (372), as well as to the "Falling towers" (373), that we encounter shortly after the hordes' appearance. And, of course, the particular London site singled out for ruin in the poem's final verse paragraph, London Bridge, is precisely the bridge crossed by Eliot's enervated crowds in "The Burial of the Dead."

In fact, in many ways The Waste Land is a poem formally and thematically concerned with both ruins and crowds - and, more obliquely, with historically specific links between spatial ruination and crowd psychology within the experience of urban modernity. That the conclusion to the spectral crowd scene in "The Burial of the Dead" is a line from Charles Baudelaire's Les Fleurs du Mal (1857) reveals how Eliot's poem incorporates aspects of crowd experience central to Baudelaire's work. Baudelaire famously portrays in Les Fleurs du Mal the figure of the flâneur, the idle urban wanderer who perceives and participates in (but remains finally detached from) crowd life, and The Waste Land's textual tour through London can be read as an act of literary flâneurie. Beyond this, however, the experience of shock that Walter Benjamin discerns in Baudelaire's depictions of urban crowds also tinges Eliot's enterprise: for Benjamin, members of urban crowds erect psychic barriers to parry the excessive sensory and psychological stimulation produced by the modern city's sights and sounds, as well as by the undue proximity and jostling of fellow walkers of crowded city streets. The abrupt shocks of urban crowd experience manifest themselves in The Waste Land's fragmentary literary form: the poem's abrupt cuts, as well as its disjointed

assemblage of quotations, endow the reader's experience of Eliot's text with the shocks and disorientation germane to modern crowd experience. What has been described earlier in this chapter as a fragmentation characteristic of ruins thus reveals itself also in the psychological states engendered in urban crowd members by the built form of the modern city; the very metropolitan development (governmentally endorsed and regulated) that generates material ruins through creative destruction also fosters a built city space that produces crowding by constraining human movement. The Waste Land, in representing London's material ruination, thus also formally and thematically encodes the ruinous psychic states characteristic of urban crowding necessitated by creatively destructive development.

But if one perceives the hooded, crowd-like hordes who topple towers in "What the Thunder Said" as enabling urban ruin that allows for redemptive rebuilding, how is this sense of crowds as potentially revolutionary squared with the patently docile, deadened collectivity we see in "The Burial of the Dead" - a collectivity gripped by anomie and psychic isolation as "each man fixed his eyes before his feet" (65)? As Jeffrey T. Schnapp argues, representations of crowds (a form of agglomeration unique to urban life) across the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries illuminate the bivalent qualities of the crowd. On the one hand, modern crowds can be seen as heterogeneous, unstable agglomerations: "modern multitudes were ... the volatile protagonists of a volatile era.... They were the result of the promiscuous intermingling and physical massing of social classes, age groups, races, nationalities, and genders along the great boulevards of the modern metropolis." ${ }^{13}$ On the other hand, and in contrast to this instability, crowds can be seen as tending towards chilling deindividualization and uniformity, pliable and ripe for the shaping powers of demagoguery: "individuals ... lose their contours in order to regain them within the confines of a single corporate body" (Schnapp 5).

While the zombie-like crowd that flows over London Bridge in "The Burial of the Dead" represents this latter, fearfully homogeneous crowd formation, The Waste Land hints at the latent volatility of all collectives by progressing from this image (in the poem's first section) to that of the "hooded hordes" (in the poem's last section). Posed symmetrically, these twinned collectives evoke in The Waste Land's movement between them the possibility of revolutionary upheaval in the poem's deadened city. After all, while the homogeneous crowd of part I traverses London Bridge and stops at the tower of Saint Mary Woolnoth, the "hooded hordes" of part V arise poetically in proximity to "Falling towers" (373) and the destruction of London Bridge ("London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down," 426). Moreover, if (as Eliot scholars have argued) Madame Sosostris's tarot pack

includes all the characters who people The Waste Land, it is significant that she describes these figures as "crowds of people" (56): the poem's various subjectivities flow into one another (or, alternatively, as Eliot claims in note 218 to the poem, are united in Tiresias), mimicking the dialectics of volatility and homogeneity, autonomy and heteronomy, and selfhood and anonymity that are proper to urban crowds. We can read the poem's intermingling voices as crowded, their literary form arising from the conditions of the city, rendering the poem's dialogism an outgrowth of and reflection upon historically specific conditions of civic life and governance in Eliot's time.

In concert with The Waste Land's depictions (and formal enactment) of ruin, a fascination with architectural preservation also animates the poem; this fascination evinces in the poem's treatment of spatial destruction a concomitant awareness of how built space functions vitally in sustaining urban public spheres and communal imaginaries. Such an awareness charges the poem's depiction of a lavish urban interior at the opening of "A Game of Chess." On the room's walls appear representations of a "carvèd dolphin" (96) and "The change of Philomel" (99), yet the narratives these images convey are seemingly obscured from sight by the smoke that mixes in this scene of urban decadence with the "strange synthetic perfumes" (87) of the room's occupant. Here a waste product of urban decadence (the smoke mixed with perfumes) obscures the tales told on the interior's wall, allowing the poem to present a cultural heritage, etched in built space, from which its urbanites are severed. That these narratives are described shortly afterward as "withered stumps of time / ... told upon the walls" (I04-5) suggests that the cultural resonances accrued by London's built spaces no longer anchor daily experience, having been reduced to empty citations that cannot be fully remembered. Moreover, in describing these withered stories as "told" upon the walls, the poem evokes their artisanal inscription upon built space but also connotes - by way of the apocalyptic connotations of its homophone, tolled - the wall's erosion or decay, revealing the wall's susceptibility to ruin amid urban modernity's cycles of creative destruction.

Hannah Arendt's claim in The Human Condition that built space vitalizes human community - "To live together in the world means essentially that a world of things is between those who have it in common" ${ }^{14}$ - illuminates the consequences for public discourse of what The Waste Land depicts as an affective chasm separating Londoners from the histories and stories layered upon their material cityscape. The poem's preservationist impulse suggests what is lost amid processes of urban demolition fueled by mass capitalism. Beyond this, it also suggests what form a truly restorative process of ruin and rebuilding must take - that is, it must recalibrate how citizens relate to the material cityscape, reinvigorating a sense of lived history encoded in

built form, rendering such form more experientially real. Andrea Zemgulys convincingly identifies The Waste Land's various churches as sites of preservationist desire, noting that "churches are orienting landmarks and spectacles [in the poem], refuges exceptional in the city even though essential to its fabric." ${ }^{15}$ One example of how churches function as spaces of refuge in the poem arises immediately after the sordid tryst between the typist and the young man carbuncular, where we encounter the church of Saint Magnus Martyr, whose walls display "Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold" (265). Zemgulys notes this church's incongruous (albeit perilously decadent) beauty amid The Waste Land's bleak cityscape; however, the "splendour" of its walls recalls the lavish interiors of "A Game of Chess," walls whose historical resonances have diminished. The Waste Land fixedly describes the architectural heritage of both Magnus Martyr and the lavish interior while simultaneously registering urbanites' indifference toward this heritage amid the urban bustle of "the profit and loss" (314).

Indeed, The Waste Land's clearest expression of preservationist desire arises in its reference to Magnus Martyr, since Eliot's note to line 264 entreats readers to consult a pamphlet by the London City Council entitled The Proposed Demolition of Nineteen City Churches. More than simply championing architectural preservation, however, this reference indicates a thoroughgoing if largely tacit engagement by The Waste Land with systems of city governance, planning, and administration. In large part the poem meditates on modes of urban governance by representing, and reflecting upon, vast infrastructural shifts in Euro-American cities from the mid-nineteenth century onward. This engagement, for instance, informs something as foundational to the poem as its foregrounding of water as a means of waste removal: as historian Joshua Goldstein notes, modern "Euro-American cities were in the grips of a veritable water mania, consuming water on a greater scale than ever before," ${ }^{16}$ spurring urban governments to pursue "the most economically efficient, healthful, and uniformly consistent infrastructure to handle urban sewage and waste" (333). In this poem, so preoccupied with the removal and cleansing of waste, water's status as a figure of regeneration reflects historically specific shifts in the relationship between urbanites and their material infrastructure. If, as Richard Lehan claims, The Waste Land "suggests that as the city lost touch with the land, with the rhythms and the psychic nourishment of nature, a spiritual meaning was lost," ${ }^{17}$ attending to Eliot's renderings of urban infrastructure and energy systems across the poem reveals such psychic, spiritual loss as in part the outgrowth of specific, changeable programs of urban governance.

The Thames River, accorded a central role in London life by The Waste Land's spatial imagination, serves as an intersection for the poem's concerns

with material infrastructure, city governance, waste treatment processes, and urban energy systems. In "The Fire Sermon" we learn of the Thames that "The river sweats / Oil and tar" (266-7), with the verb "sweats" likening oil to a bodily excrescence, insinuating its vital role within an urban body politic. These lines inaugurate a scattershot set of voices that reference - in lines whose brevity instills a sense of rapid movement - a series of spaces within and beyond London (Highbury, Richmond, Kew, Moorgate, Margate Sands) ending in the ruined site of Carthage, whose temporal and geographic distance from the other cataloged spaces renders it a figure for the ruin that threatens them. Itself a fuel source for the rapid movement poetically enacted in this conclusion to "The Fire Sermon," oil (and its fuel derivative, gasoline) subtly undergirds the section's indictment of urban form and culture: beyond the oily face of the young man carbuncular, gasoline appears in the image of the typist "light[ing] / Her stove" (222-3), as well as in the "gashouse" (190) behind which the speaker sits while fishing in the Thames. Oil, the river's pollutant, fuels not only the automobiles whose "sound[s] of horns and motors" (197) the speaker hears, it also fuels The Waste Land's very multivocality. Oil's subtle but vital presence to The Waste Land's poetic form reveals itself in Tiresias's description of himself as "throbbing between two lives" (218) - an image of subjective flux that recalls the lines that immediately precede it, where a human body appears as a "human engine wait[ing]/ Like a taxi throbbing" (216-17). Both Tiresias and the gasoline-powered taxi throb, yet if we read Tiresias as this poem's organizing consciousness, then Tiresias's "throbbing," taxi-like movements between diverse characters and voices reveal themselves as steeped in an urban infrastructure reliant upon oil. Reflecting new energy systems of urban modernity, The Waste Land's poetic form in this way can be understood as oil-fueled.

This oil-soaked infrastructure informs city life across The Waste Land: London's persistent "brown fog" (6I), as well as the "Sighs ... exhaled" (64) by its crowd members, recall automotive exhaust. Yet the poem offers, even if only provisionally, a model for restorative urban governance through the oil-soaked Thames water it depicts. This model discloses itself through the poem's twinned fishing scenes - the first in "The Fire Sermon," the second in "What the Thunder Said." In the first scene, the speaker, at whose back lies the city's oil-saturated energy and transportation infrastructure (as evoked by sounds of cars, as well as by the gashouse), fishes in the polluted river while reflecting on those who recently populated its shores, such as the "loitering heirs of City directors" (180). While primarily referencing executives in London's financial sector, the phrase "City directors" also connotes those who direct London itself that is, its administrators and governors. (Indeed, the referential richness

of "directors" here signals the extent to which the interests of financiers and urban administrators converge in this city of creatively destructive development.) Echoing this first fishing scene, "What the Thunder Said" offers at its conclusion a speaker once more fishing, with the speaker's back turned not to a sordid city but instead to "the arid plain" (424) left after the city's destruction. Once more, too, this representation of fishing coincides with an image of governance; however, this second scene offers a form of governance far removed from that connoted by the phrase "City directors." Rather, fishing resurfaces in The Waste Land immediately after the thunder's final injunction:

Damyata: The boat responded
Gaily, to the hand expert with sail and oar
The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
Gaily, when invited, beating obedient
To controlling hands (418-23)
This passage posits a method of governance (Damyata means "control") attuned to water's flows - and, more broadly, to the natural world. In this way, it evinces the sorts of "reforms" that The Waste Land envisions as vital to what could become a renewed urban order. It is not surprising, then, that immediately following these images of governance and fishing we encounter the question that serves as this chapter's introduction to urban form in the poem: "Shall I at least set my lands in order?" (425). By this point, having traversed The Waste Land's ruinous geographies, readers can better comprehend the ethical, political, and aesthetic stakes of the speaker's proposal. Ordering, whether administrative or poetic, emerges in The Waste Land as inescapably provisional, an imperfect attempt to shore volatile forces against an eroding bank. This is because Eliot's poetic ordering of urban experience charts the unsettling disorder occasioned by urban modernity while nevertheless performing and imagining new urban forms.

# NOTES 

I T. S. Eliot to Eleanor Hinkley, April 26, 1922, in The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed., (London: Faber and Faber, 2009), 17 .
2 Eliot, "London Letter," The Dial (October 1921): 453.
3 For a sweeping treatment of The Waste Land's engagement with notions of primitivism, see Robert Crawford, The Savage and the City in the Work of T. S. Eliot (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987).
4 Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays (London: Faber and Faber, 1969), 426. Subsequent references to The Waste Land will be cited parenthetically by line number.

5 Eluned Summers-Bremner, "Unreal City and Dream Deferred: Psychogeographies of Modernism in T. S. Eliot and Langston Hughes," Geomodernisms: Race, Modernism, Modernity, ed. Laura Doyle and Laura Winkiel (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005), 262.
6 Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space, trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith (1974; Oxford: Blackwell, 1991), 39.
7 Eleanor Cook, "T. S. Eliot and the Carthaginian Peace," ELH 46 (1979): 342.
8 Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendall (1984; Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 115.
9 Karl Marx, The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert C. Tucker (New York: Norton, 1978), 476.

Io Nick Yablon, Untimely Ruins: An Archaeology of American Urban Modernity, 1819-1919 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 7.
I I Tim Edensor, Industrial Ruins: Space, Aesthetics and Materiality (London: Berg, 2005), 14 I.

I2 Yablon, Untimely Ruins, 5.
13 Jeffrey T. Schnapp, "Mob Porn," Crowds, ed. Schnapp and Matthew Tiews (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2006), 3.
14 Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (1958; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 52.
15 Andrea Zemgulys, Modernism and the Locations of Literary Heritage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 144.
16 Joshua Goldstein, "Waste," The Oxford Handbook of the History of Consumption, ed. Frank Trentmann (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 332 .
17 Richard Lehan, The City in Literature: An Intellectual and Cultural History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 134.
