# 3 

LYNDALL GORDON

## "Mixing/Memory and Desire": What Eliot's Biography Can Tell Us

During the Christmas vacation in 1914, T. S. Eliot stayed at I Gordon Street, Gordon Square, in the Bloomsbury area of London. At that time it was a pension full of transient Americans. Eliot himself was a Harvard graduate student on a year's traveling fellowship at Merton College, Oxford. He didn't care much for Oxford and was astonished by the license it gave women students - this would be Vera Brittain's generation of spirited feminists ${ }^{1}$ - to intrude themselves upon lectures. It disturbed his sense of fitness that they came "right into" a men's college. "No one looks at them," he assured his proper, Boston family. ${ }^{2}$

Yet he could not entirely avert his eyes from urban women in the streets of London. "One walks about the street with one's desires," he confided to his Harvard friend, Conrad Aiken, on New Year's eve. "[N]ervous sexual attacks" came upon him, while his "refinement" rose up "like a wall" shyness built up by ingrained propriety. It worried him to be still a virgin at the age of "twenty-six." ${ }^{3}$ What Eliot does not tell Aiken is that his father looked on extramarital sex as tantamount to consorting with "the Devil." Syphilis was "God's punishment for nastiness," and Mr. Eliot senior hoped that a cure would never be found. ${ }^{4}$ His son was to share his father's disgust in a series of loveless scenes in The Waste Land: the automatism of the clerk and typist who couple like "crawling bugs" (in Eliot's draft of this scene, toned down by Ezra Pound), ${ }^{5}$ followed by the sorry stories of the Thames daughters, one of whom "'raised my knees/ Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe'" (294-5). A merchant invites his prey for a weekend at "the Metropole" (214) - not a very nice hotel - and the far from refined Sweeney is driving along, amidst "horns and motors," on his way to Mrs. Porter's brothel (197-8).

I want to suggest how rooted The Waste Land was in personal issues and preoccupations coming to the fore in Eliot's life from 1911 to 1915, many years before the poem, as we know it, came to light in 1922. These were the years just before and after he left America for Europe. One question

is the impact of Eliot's migration on the poem that would emerge from a prolonged period of engagement with - or, it may be, disengagement from a foreign place, intensified by union with an Englishwoman who proved stranger in her ways than he dreamed when they met.

In March 1915, after another dull term in wartime Oxford, a fellow American at Magdalen College introduced Eliot to a flamboyant young woman, Vivienne Haigh-Wood. She was a few months older, nearly twenty-seven, and had fairly recently lost her boyfriend. (This schoolmaster, Charles Buckle, had enlisted on the outbreak of war, but it is evident, from Vivienne's diary, that he was relieved to get away from her.) There was a lunch party, followed by punting and dancing. She danced with verve, caught on to transatlantic steps, smoked, offered daring opinions on the arts, and encouraged Eliot to be what he felt himself to be: a poet. Her outspokenness and emotional extravagance, novel to the formal rectitude of Eliot's New England, seemed to offer rescue from that wall of inhibition.

Six days after Eliot went down from Oxford, he changed the course of his life. Instead of returning, as expected, to America, he married Vivienne in London, at the Hampstead Registry Office, a quick, secret marriage before parents on either side could be told. It may have been the only way that a moral young man could abandon virginity.

Vivienne's father was a successful artist, a Royal Academician, and the family lived in middle-class comfort in Compayne Gardens on the fringe of Hampstead - a respectable address, though not on the literary heights of this north London suburb. The Haigh-Woods' origin, which Vivienne was determined to leave behind, was Lancashire craftsman; that is, not as grand as the Eliots, who belonged to the Boston elite, with a line of divines (as Puritan New England ministers were called) behind them. The spontaneous freedom of Vivienne's voice and actress-manner did not make her the kind of lady a gentleman of that time would wish to introduce to his mother, ${ }^{6}$ yet there was the stimulus, for Eliot, of Vivienne's eagerness to push him forward. "I supply the motive power," she informed Eliot's brother, Henry Ware Eliot Jr., "and I do shove." ${ }^{7}$

Eliot's impulse was not without a rationale, urged by Pound, who, like Vivienne, at once recognized the modernist revolution of "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" and Eliot's other early poems. The idea was to remain in London as an international literary center. Like Pound, Eliot despised "provincialism," and though he actually had much in common with Nathaniel Hawthorne, historically and temperamentally, he was resolved not to fall into what he saw as the narrowness of the New England writer. Eliot meant to jolt himself onto a different biographical track: expatriation at any cost with the advantage to his poetry of inspecting that cost (as he does at once

in a prose-poem, "Hysteria," based on the shock of Vivienne's uncontrolled public behavior). His impulsive commitment to her, well below the impersonal surface of The Waste Land, is, conceivably, a source for "The awful daring of a moment's surrender" (403).

If "surrender" meant licensed surrender to a woman - a legitimate wife it was certainly "daring" in the sense of reckless, for Eliot barely knew Vivienne, and his attraction to her did not survive. By July 9, two weeks into the marriage, Vivienne confessed to her husband's one-time teacher, Bertrand Russell, ${ }^{8}$ that she had married Eliot to stimulate him, and had found she could not do so. Since Eliot was present, reclining listlessly across the table, it was a measure of Vivienne's disappointment that she spoke so openly. Her need of reassurance was not lost on Russell, who began to fix his lascivious eye on this unhappy bride.

To Eliot this was a "Poe-bride" in a quite different drama to Russell's diverting scene of seduction. In one of the fragments of The Waste Land manuscript, Eliot imagines the horror of a man who finds himself joined to a draining creature who will leave him lifeless. Vivienne both acted out this horror tale and upstaged it with the domestic English narrative of her letters.

Vivienne's letters and her satiric fictional sketches in the early twenties dramatize how foreign Americans appear to her, requiring explanations of Englishness (in part, insistent justifications of her conduct). The three-way situation she sets up with Russell, which will lead to a prolonged flirtation and an act of adultery, has the added tension of an Anglo-American drama in which the American is the alien party. In short, a power game was in play, which would persist throughout the marriage. Both husband and wife were given to disillusion - this much, they had in common - and locked together on this shaky basis, they groped toward a measure of sympathy for each other. Marriage in the Eliot family was irrevocable. There was no precedent for divorce.

Yet the line, "By this, and this only, we have existed" (405), which follows " $[t]$ he awful daring" (403), should give us pause. Eliot himself existed as more than lover or husband or even as aspiring poet; his life both before and after his surrender to marriage suggests a desire for surrender to what The Waste Land calls "controlling hands" (422).

The earliest source for words voiced in the poem are Sanskrit instructions in a book that Eliot acquired ten years before The Waste Land was published. In 1912, when Eliot attended J. R. Lanman's classes in Indic philosophy at Harvard, his teacher gave him a copy of The Twenty-Eight Upanishads, and tipped in by Lanman were words of wisdom, "da datta, dämyata, dayadhvam." ${ }^{\text {T }}$ These remained lodged in Eliot's memory until he

wrote them down in December 1921 as the finale to The Waste Land, part V, "the only part that justifies the whole, at all," as Eliot told Bertrand Russell. ${ }^{10}$

The Sanskrit instructions, resonating in thunder, are thrillingly unfamiliar: give, sympathise, control. (Control, "Damyata," comes last in the poem.) None of these words means what the translation appears to suggest. Eliot's gloss on "give" is not in the first place moral. There is no sense of charity; more the awful daring of surrender. " Sympathise," again is not exactly moral; rather an openness to "aetherial rumours" (415); and "control" means to beat "obedient / To controlling hands" (421-2). In Eliot's gloss it involves a more complete and momentous surrender, something like conversion. It makes the message of the thunder a divine call, as momentous in its way as the commandments delivered to the Israelites, who had turned their backs on civilization, Egypt, to wander in the wilderness of Sinai.

A desire to beat obedient to divine control is not what we commonly understand by "desire;" and is not, in fact opposed to, sexual desire in the base, exploitative practice exhibited by the poem. We might even say that sexual desire, as showcased in the poem, is limited to lust, a contaminating kind of lust, if we recall that in one of Eliot's drafts he noted the scurf in the clerk's hair and his pause to urinate and spit on his way downstairs. Where the poem is taking us, once we are suitably appalled by the flesh, is into the mountains, along the route of some forgotten pilgrimage, past a broken chapel, toward a sign. ${ }^{\text {II }}$ Religious or not, we are moved toward some intimation of desire as spiritual thirst - thirst for something we do not know, which lies outside the poem, lost in dead-end worldly narratives throughout the ages, but alive to Eliot as a student raising overwhelming questions in his Harvard classes.

In the course of Eliot's philosophical studies, on October 20, 1912, he heard a lecture about the ancient Greek philosopher, Heraclitus, who (Eliot notes) disowned the city for a life of contemplation in the hills. Much of Eliot's reading during his last years at Harvard confirms his exploration of extreme states of being on the outposts of existence, courting death. This is the biblical landscape of spiritual desire and trial. The earliest fragments of what would become The Waste Land take place at these outposts: "I am the Resurrection," "So through the evening" (the earliest version of the climactic part V), and a failed-martyr poem, "The Death of St. Narcissus," which Eliot completed during his stay in Gordon Square during that Oxford vacation of 1914-15. ${ }^{12}$

Like the Desert Fathers of the fourth century, Narcissus goes into a desert to pray and commune with himself; only, his motives are impure. He has a

masochistic view to martyrdom. And he is a solitary who cannot bear the crowd, the press of thighs and knees. This looks forward to a comment Eliot made to Lytton Strachey in 1919 two years into his post at Lloyd's Bank in the City: "I am sojourning among the termites." ${ }^{13}$ This, in turn, looks forward to one of the opening scenes of The Waste Land, caught on camera in a book of London Views, which Eliot owned: the crowd flowing to work over London Bridge, "so many,/ I had not thought death had undone so many" (62-3). The workaday crowd on London Bridge, near Lloyd's Bank, turns out to be a scene from Dante's Inferno. This is one central strategy: to transform the documentary into the surreal. What he makes of the scene goes back, once again, to 1911-12, for at that time Eliot carried a copy of Dante in his pocket and learned passages by heart on long train journeys between St. Louis and Massachusetts.

Repeatedly in his poetry, Eliot also recalls the sea as he knew it at Cape Ann, Massachusetts. In 1896 his father had built a house at Eastern Point, beyond the fishing town of Gloucester. In the harbor were the tall masts of what was an all-sail fishing fleet; and fishermen, lounging at the corner of Main Street and Duncan Street, told yarns of storms and shipwrecks on the half-hidden rocks offshore. Working in winter gales, the deep-sea fishermen put out from their schooner in tiny dories which often capsized or were lost in fog or snow. As a boy Eliot took in casual acts of heroism, and they are the source for the original part IV in The Waste Land manuscript: a long narrative of a fishing expedition that takes men to the edge of mortality, ending with a sailor washed clean and refashioned by the ocean. ${ }^{14}$ Not far from where Eliot worked in the City, he encountered the "fishmen" who "lounge at noon" (263) at the Billingsgate fish market in Lower Thames Street. Eliot's enduring memory of the Gloucester fishermen make them precursors to a rare scene in the grim London of The Waste Land. For a moment, the fishmen lift the spirit, as does the "Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold" (265) of the high Anglo-Catholic church, St. Magnus the Martyr, on the same street.

In Cambridge, Massachusetts, Eliot frequented the home of his mother's widowed sister, Mrs. Holmes Hinkley, at I Berkeley Place. He felt especially at home with his cousin, Eleanor Hinkley, a graduate of Radcliffe College, who enrolled in a playwriting course. Eliot, sharing her taste for drama, delighted in offering her absurd scenarios. Here, at Eleanor's home in about 1912, Eliot met her friend, Emily Hale, another young woman serious about drama. Emily had the gifts to be an actress: a presence, a resonant voice, and an ear for language. She also had beauty: wavy dark brown hair that shone when the light fell on it; a lovely curve to her cheek; and a slim, upright

figure. Her manners combined the decorum of old Boston with humor and empathy.

She and Eliot performed together on February 17, 1913 in a comic scene from Jane Austen's Emma, dramatized by Eleanor. Eliot, who tended to worry over his health, was cast as the wrapped-up hypochondriac Mr. Woodhouse, and Emily Hale played the vulgar snob, Mrs. Elton, as elegant as pearls could make her, who continually brings talk around to the smartness of her sister's barouche-landau. The scene was part of a Stunt Show, ${ }^{15}$ in aid of charity, with an audience of family and friends. Eliot and Emily Hale performed in front of the fireplace in the parlor in the Hinkley home.

Her aplomb as an actress had about it an air of courage which, given her history, was touching. She was born in 1891, three years after Eliot. When her infant brother died, her mother became a permanent mental invalid, and Emily was brought up by her mother's sister, Aunt Edith, and her husband, Uncle John, on Beacon Hill among the leading families of Boston. Uncle John was the Reverend John Carroll Perkins, a pillar of Boston Unitarianism (as were several of Eliot's relatives). Uncle John and Aunt Edith did not approve of the stage for a lady, so Emily, who was devoted to them, had to content herself with amateur performances. Her uncle did not send Emily to college, a handicap to her future career as a speech and drama teacher and director of plays in various schools and colleges from Scripps in California to Smith in Northampton, Massachusetts. It is testimony to how terrific she was at her job that she managed wherever she went to excite schoolgirls and students about drama.

Eliot fell in love with Emily between 1912 and leaving Boston in mid-1914 for his year's traveling fellowship; and though, at the close of that year, he chose to remain in England and cast his lot with Vivienne, he never forgot Emily Hale. He would draw repeatedly on her memory not only in The Waste Land but also in his plays and in Burnt Norton ("Footfalls echo in the memory"), the first of his Four Quartets. In the thirties Eliot sought her advice about his most autobiographical play, The Family Reunion, in which the relations of Harry and Mary are derived from Eliot's renewed tie to Emily Hale after he finally left Vivienne.

At the start of their tie, Eliot wrote a poem about a girl of memorable loveliness and pathos, weeping when her lover leaves. What's curious about "La Figlia che Piange" is the date: 1912. ${ }^{16}$ It means that Eliot composed this scene immediately on meeting Emily, and two years before he left America. It's prophetic that in this poem love does not stand a chance. The lover and a girl with her arms full of flowers part with artistic grace, her body posed and directed for maximum effect:

Stand on the highest pavement of the stair -
Lean on a garden urn -
Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair -
Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise -
Fling them to the ground and turn
With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair. ("La Figlia Che Piange" I-7)
The poet does wonder "how they should have been together!" (2I) but prefers his fantasy of the beautifully controlled, unmessy parting - "a gesture and a pose" (22) (- which he may enshrine forever in his memory and his art. The lover loses the flesh and blood; the poet yet possesses her. There is more than a hint of triumph amid his regret, like Henry James lamenting Minny Temple's death. (Minny would be "a pure and eloquent vision" locked, incorruptibly, in the crystal walls of the past. $)^{17}$ Nine years later Eliot worked a scene like this into The Waste Land and, from that distance in mood and time, a regretful voice remembers "when we came back, late, from the hyacinth garden, / Your arms full, and your hair wet" (37-8). This might-have-been has no place in the waste of the present, where there is no longer a fertile love with the power to transform him: "Those are pearls that were his eyes" (48).

We know as yet too little, but my guess is that an ambiguous Jamesian situation lies behind this momentary escape through memory from a lifeless existence. Eliot tells posterity (in a late memoir reported briefly by his second wife) that, before he left America, he offered Emily a declaration of love, but (so far) we are not told that he proposed marriage, and if he did not, she had to be cautious. He was leaving to go abroad; if he did not commit himself in so many words, she was not obliged to commit herself to waiting for him. An elderly Eliot presents a forlorn image of a rejected lover when he says that Emily showed no sign whatever of reciprocating his feelings, but it is likely that the situation between them was more complex. For one thing, the misogyny in Eliot's obscene Bolo and Columbo verses, which he began circulating as an undergraduate and was still tossing off in 1914, works up a counter to lovelorn reverence. The traditional polarization of the female into innocent "figlia" versus the "whore" of the Bolo verses puts living women at a distance, to dwell instead on the grotesque spectacle of a penis so mighty it can rip up a whore "from my cunt to my navel." ${ }^{18}$ This revel in sexual violence, carried by bouncing rhymes, is varied by the antics of King Bolo and his Big Black Kween whose bum is a big as a soup tureen.

On the one hand, there was the Eliot whom Emily Hale would recognize as "a man of extremes." ${ }^{19}$ On the other hand, there was his home-loving aspect, which Eliot's second wife, Valerie, saw as definitive. Undoubtedly, Eliot had this domestic side, in play later with Janet Adam Smith, who

described the way he fitted into her family life, and with self-effacing Mrs. Tandy, whom he called affectionately, "Pollytandy," a deserted wife, who knitted him a Fair Isle pullover, bought him scarlet slippers, and sent him fresh produce from the country, with eggs tucked in moss, at Easter. During the eight years of his second marriage, from 1957 until the end, he lived entirely in his domestic character with a wife who would protect him for a generation after his death.

Home was all the more precious after what home had been during the "most awful nightmare" of his first marriage. ${ }^{20}$ That nightmare of an incompatible couple locked together is an obvious source for the disaffected couple in the second part of The Waste Land. Pound thought this scene too close to life: he scrawled "photo" on the typescript next to the wife's stinging challenge, "Are you alive, or not?" ${ }^{21}$ Vivienne thought their non-dialogue "WONDERFUL." ${ }^{22}$ The couple have irreconcilable narratives in their heads. The questioning, nervous wife is playing a scene from a marriage: legal union should be leading to empathy. She hopes for communication; the husband shuts her out. "Do you remember / Nothing?" (122-3), she prods. "I remember / The hyacinth garden" is his silent, inexorable reply in a passage Eliot cut. ${ }^{23}$

The memory the husband preserves is not of Emily Hale as she was, a comic actress performing as Mrs. Elton, nor of the Emily whom Eliot enquired after in polite tones when he wrote to his cousin, Eleanor Hinkley, and to whom he sent "a nice letter" in the summer of 1919. ${ }^{24}$ She was not perhaps even the Emily to whom Eliot had sent a sheaf of pink or red roses (through Aiken) late in 1914 (in honor of her Saturday night performance for the Cambridge Dramatic Society), just three months before he met Vivienne. By the time Eliot conceived the memory of the "hyacinth girl" in 1921, Emily the person was stilled as an image of purity, elevated above the dross of daily contacts. This scene, "mixing / Memory and desire" (2-3), sets up a defiant claim to intact, unadulterated desire. Emily Hale, sealed off in memory, has yet a role to play, not necessarily in the flesh but crucially in a creative future ${ }^{25}$ in which love must pass beyond its object, "Looking into the heart of light, the silence" (4I).

While Vivienne brought a history of illness into the marriage, Eliot brought a revulsion for the body (fueled by fantasies of dirty frenzy) evident in his Bolo verses. During the period of The Waste Land's gestation, he was prepared to publish these verses, but Wyndham Lewis, to whom they were offered for his avant-garde magazine, Blast, declined to print words "Ending in -Uck, -Unt and -Ugger." ${ }^{26}$

At first, when I came upon the Bolo verses, I assumed these to be a juvenile aberration. The recently published third volume of Letters (covering the

period of Eliot's conversion to the Anglican faith in June 1927) presents a challenge. For the obscene verse that Eliot continued to write and disseminate as late as the age of forty-four ${ }^{27}$ is not in his own post-conversion view an aberration. In an exchange with fellow publisher Geoffrey Faber, in August 1927, he commends obscenity, in the manner of Swift, as an eye for evil. ${ }^{28}$

Here is an elevated justification, and I have tried to accept it. ${ }^{29}$ All the same, hesitation has lingered. For one thing, an eye for evil is dangerously godlike, a danger acknowledged by Eliot's Puritan forebear, Andrew Eliott, who condemned innocents to death in the Salem witch trials. In 1692 Andrew Eliott confessed that he and his co-jurors had been unable to withstand the delusions of the powers of darkness. What do we make of his descendant when his darkest voice comes forward to condemn "Those who suffer the ecstasy of the animals, meaning / Death"? ${ }^{30}$ Can Eliot be something of a throwback to the punitive temper of those old New England Puritans, and as such foreign, after all, to the mild-mannered Anglicans, whose faith he adopted?

Hesitation lingers also because the pervasive history of violence against women makes it impossible to be amused by the incitement to sexual violence that accompanies Eliot's obscenity. This violence is not imaginative. It is as banal as Eliot's stabs at anti-Semitism - as banal as evil. Joseph Conrad observed the banality of evil at the heart of Heart of Darkness. For Eliot, this 1899 novel confirmed his spectatorial horror as he moved about London, eyeing the substratum of baseness in human nature and piecing together his own "sepulchral city," in the run-up to The Waste Land. His alignment of the two works comes in his original epigraph from Heart of Darkness, "The horror! The horror!" ${ }^{31}$

To inspect baseness so intently is to shake the barriers of protective sanity. Conrad's narrator, walking about the sepulchral city, ${ }^{32}$ has to refrain from laughing in faces full of stupid importance and admits his closeness to breakdown: "I daresay I was not very well at that time." ${ }^{33}$ Eliot, as we know, had a breakdown during the last three months of 1921 and completed The Waste Land at the sanatorium of Dr. Vittoz in Lausanne. His capacity to be disturbed, like much else in the poem, went back a long way. From 1911, when Eliot was in Paris, through 1912, he was writing what I think of as vigil poems: his speaker lies awake at night tormented by a dark state of mind, questioning the nature of existence.

This crisis of an unquiet soul craving certainty was succeeded by a condition of continuous crisis that Eliot took upon himself in his union with Vivienne. For all the stress of Vivienne's persistent ills and struggles that went on in an overmedicated fog, she supplied Eliot with daily evidence of depletion not unlike his own. As an Englishwoman, Vivienne validated

what her transplanted husband perceived: the emptiness of urban routines. Living so close to psychic collapse, she was as sensitive as her husband to the artifice of meaningless control in conforming to so-called civilization. She accompanied Eliot when they walked suburban streets by night, sensing the horror of lives behind decorous curtains. Both, in fact, were susceptible to the surreal. Both were tuned to a high-strung pitch, the frenzy of Eliot's Bolo fantasies a match for Vivienne's frenzy when she threw her nightdress out of a window into Trafalgar Square. "As to Tom's mind, I am his mind," she claimed. ${ }^{34}$ Had Eliot's life followed the narrative laid out for him - had he returned to Harvard and become a professor of philosophy and married the well-conducted Emily Hale (who came to see him as the love of her life) - The Waste Land as we know it could not have been.
"Worry," as Eliot called this state in confidence to Sydney Waterlow ${ }^{35}$ went on from year to year as he accumulated the ragbag of fragments toward a long poem. During his treatment in Lausanne, he found some degree of calm. He was freed there from all marital and work obligations, and he found it relieving to be among other foreigners. In London he had masked his strangeness with an English façade: the office uniform of dark suit, stiff collar, bowler hat, and rolled umbrella. Aiken, visiting after the war, noticed how Eliot had Anglicized himself to a degree that nothing of the American appeared to remain. In turn, Eliot's brother, explaining the breakdown to their mother on December 12, 1921, deduced two causes: Vivienne and expatriation. ${ }^{36}$

Henry reports how impossible it was for his brother "to do creative work (other than the critical) at home." After his day at the bank Eliot came home to a wife's "demand[]" for "attention." Henry puts the entire blame on Vivienne, since he is skeptical about her ills and indifferent to the effect on her of a loveless marriage. As Henry puts it in this letter of December 12, Vivienne "is easily offended if she does not get [attention] well buttered with graciousness and sympathy." In Henry's opinion, his brother would be cured if he could have a little time to himself "to gratify his desire to do creative writing" (Ibid.). This desire was brilliantly fulfilled in the solitude of the Swiss pension in December 1921, as Eliot wrote part V of The Waste Land, in a sustained creative burst with hardly a word changed, at the very time of Henry's diagnosis. The second problem was stickier.
"The strain of going out among people who after all are foreigners to him, and, I believe, always must be to an American - even Henry James never became a complete Englishman - has, I think, been to him pretty heavy" (Ibid.). He recalls a despairing confidence from his brother in 1919, breaking through the stiff, conservative mask: how hard Eliot finds it "to live with a foreign nation ... one is always coming up against differences of feeling that

make one feel humiliated and lonely. One remains always a foreigner." ${ }^{37}$ His caution made him fear to be himself - he might reveal the throbbing tom-tom of a savage. So he disguised himself with protective resemblances. "It is like being always on dress parade - one can never relax. It is a great strain. And society is in a way much harder, not gentler. People are more aware of you, more critical, and they have no pity for one's mistakes.... They are always intriguing and caballing; one must be very alert. They are sensitive, and easily become enemies" (Ibid.).

Eliot's friend, Mary Hutchinson, who read The Waste Land soon after its completion, said the poem was "Tom's autobiography." ${ }^{88}$ Eliot appears to endorse this subjective view of the poem when he claimed that, to him, it was a "personal ... grouse against life." ${ }^{39}$

These statements deprecate the commoner view of the poem as an impersonal social document accumulating evidence against civilization through all the ages: the stagnation of citizens locked into deadening routines of work and coupling. Eliot does define deadness in part by scenes like the crowd flowing to work on the dead sound of the stroke of nine and by the apathy of abused women. Many of his contemporary readers identified with what they took to be modish, postwar disillusion. Eliot resisted this reading, not, I think, because it is invalid, but because these readers missed the fact that the poem also defines deadness by what is not dead: the hyacinth girl, the fishmen, Magnus Martyr, the purity of children's voices, a damp gust bringing rain, the message of the thunder and following it, the question or possibility of putting lands in order.

These are hints and guesses of something that is not waste and, as such, is anti-wasteland. What I am suggesting is that, in part, The Waste Land is defined by a visionary alternative we cannot quite grasp before it fades and eludes us. So, to sink into a waste is to experience this loss of what Eliot terms "reality" and to find ourselves repeatedly trapped in an "Unreal City" (60). Reality, at this point in Eliot's work, remains undefined, implied by its absence. Some fifteen years later, he will find "reality" - after leaving Vivienne in 1933 - in the rose garden of the English country house, Burnt Norton, which he will visit in 1934 in the company of Emily Hale. This visit will evoke a recurrence of the visionary moment associated with the hyacinth girl, "Looking into the heart of light" (4I).

In The Waste Land, back in 1921, what follows that radiant memory is a collapse into hopelessness, a line in German from the opera, Tristan und Isolde, reporting a vacant horizon: no love is coming across the sea. To lose what is anti-wasteland is the very condition of being in the waste. The mass of its inhabitants - the workers crossing London Bridge, the typist and the

clerk, the yapping Cockneys in the pub - are too oblivious of their condition to suffer the realization that the poem grants those who enter its ominous silences, marking its repeated loss of vision.

This visionary alternative, I want to suggest, had an older, deeper, and more lasting source in Eliot's biography than what he witnessed in the streets of his adoptive city. That unforgettable alternative continued to reside in the Indian scriptures, in the memory of Emily Hale transformed as hyacinth girl, and going further back in Eliot's memory, to the Gloucester fishermen who lived daily on the edge of mortality.

In other words, the London of The Waste Land, from a biographical angle, is less a documentary scene than a projection from an inward deadness, an awareness of which is sharpened by live memories, live desire. Evanescent though they are, memories provide a counterpoise to dead souls and are therefore vital, in every sense, to the poem. A thirst for revelation, which in the end does come, points beyond a poem that has no full stop at the end. Meanwhile, the searcher remains at some interface, jolting ever faster between his "ruins" and an elusive peace, which he can apprehend but not hold.

Is The Waste Land in any sense a unified poem? Though the fragmented scenes appear to "[play] with the vagaries of recollection," ${ }^{40}$ the title lays down a comprehensive view. To contrast the multiplicity of London in Virginia Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway, the realistic London of a native, is to see more clearly the extraordinary single-mindedness of Eliot's London, the Unreal City a stranger or foreigner might observe.

In this sense the poem is unified by the experience of the poet: a student's solitary search on the outposts of consciousness epitomized by the rousing DA in the Indian scriptures; and the awakening to love for a woman, a love immediately frozen into an icon of memory associated with flowers. This constructed memory is, like DA, posed at a distance: at once in the past and in the wings as an alternative narrative. Last, chronologically, is the poet's transplanted and masked life, locked to a wild wife in an alien metropolis.

This London with its "horns and motors," its creeping rat, sordid sex, and the local pub on the border of Paddington, where Eliot would watch people coming out at closing time (near to the Eliots' cage in Crawford Mansions), came to dominate the poem Pound edited, but the documentary scenes of parts I-III were, biographically, the final overlay. Madame Sosostris, the "clairvoyante" with her tarot cards in part I seems to offer an organizing idea of the dramatis personae in the poem, but biographically this was trivial.

Many years later, in the I950s, when Eliot's friend, Mary Trevelyan, took him for reminiscent drives around those areas of London on which he had

drawn in The Waste Land, he mentioned a single visit to a fortune-teller when he was putting the poem together in 1921. He went to dine in Hampstead, he said, or it may have been Primrose Hill, with an unnamed woman he had met at the poetry circle of the Lyceum Club. She had shown him her tarot pack, the only time he had seen one. ${ }^{4 \mathrm{I}}$ In the last century there was too much attention to the tarot pack, as to various other dead-end trails, which Eliot laid for busy scholars in some allusions and notes. As Virginia Woolf observes in "The Art of Biography," our challenge is to distinguish the dead fact from "the fact that suggests and engenders." ${ }^{42}$

The most suggestive of the live facts in the biographical background to The Waste Land is the priority, both emotionally and chronologically, of Eliot's desire for what was not a wasteland. Then, too, the facts of Eliot's expatriate life and his breakdown in 1921 light up a state of being threatened by collapse, externalized in the surreal spectacle of "London bridge is falling down falling down falling down" (426). Eliot appropriated Bertrand Russell's hallucination, provoked by the philosopher's horror at the sight of troop trains of the doomed departing from Waterloo for the trenches. The image spoke to the poet's own state of collapse. I think it had less to do with the Great War, and more with a private situation: a proper Bostonian displaced and shaken by his wife's fling with Russell, repelled by what he calls, during his breakdown, "neurotic carnality," ${ }^{43}$ and propped up (how effectively remains to be seen) by intimations of "Shantih."

# NOTES 

I Vera Brittain went up to Somerville College in 1914.
2 T. S. Eliot to Eleanor Hinkley, October 14, 1914, in The Letters of T. S. Eliot: Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 70.
3 Eliot to Conrad Aiken, December 31, 1914, Letters, I, 82.
4 Henry Ware Eliot to Thomas Lamb Eliot, March 7, 1914, Letters, I, 4 I.
5 Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971 ), 45, line 143.
6 In his Journals 1982-1986 (London: Random House, 1997), Anthony Powell imagines what his mother might have said on meeting Vivienne, 230.
7 Vivienne Eliot to Henry Eliot, October II, 1916, Letters, I, 172.
8 Russell taught philosophy at Harvard in the spring semester of 1914.
9 The source is an editorial note to Letters, I, 117, where we are told that Eliot studied Sanskrit with C. R. Lanman in 1911-13. "On 6 May 1912, Lanman gave TSE a Sanskrit edition of The Twenty-Eight Upanishads (Bombay, 1906), now at King's." Lanman's "hand-written key" includes "'Brhadāranyaka, 220 (v. 1, 2, 3), Da-da-da = dāmyata datta dayadhvam.'"
Io Eliot to Bertrand Russell, October 15, 1923, Letters, 2, 257.

I I Prefigured by the cry in "Gerontion" (1919): "'We would see a sign!'" (17). What's wanted are "Signs taken for wonders" (17).
I2 Eliot refers to this poem in a letter to his new, influential mentor, Ezra Pound, on February 2, 1915, in Letters, I, 94.
13 Eliot to Lytton Strachey, June 1, 1919, Letters, I, 357.
14 See the drafts of "Death by Water" in The Waste Land: A Facsimile. See also Eliot's preface to James B. Connolly's Fishermen of the Banks (London: Faber and Faber, 1928), a favorite book of Eliot's as a child, originally called Out of Gloucester (Freeport, New York: Books for Libraries Press, 1902).
15 Program in the Eliot Collection, Houghton Library, Harvard University.
16 The date is provided in a letter from Eliot to Evdo Mason, February 21, 1936. The Humanities Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
17 Lyndall Gordon, Henry James: His Women and His Art, rev. ed. (London: Virago, 2012), 134 .
18 Eliot, "Fragments: 25," Appendix A, Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917 (London: Faber and Faber, 1996), 314.
19 Weekly book talk in the Toll Hall browsing room at Scripps College, where Emily Hale taught speech and drama. Reported in the magazine Scripture, December 12, 1932. Scripps College Archives. Eliot was at that point due to visit her.
20 Eliot to Henry Eliot, September 6, 1916, Letters I, 166.
2 I The Waste Land: A Facsimile, 13, line 5 I.
22 Ibid., written across the margin, p. i i.
23 The Waste Land: A Facsimile, 12, lines 49-50.
24 Eliot to Eleanor Hinkley, June 17, 1919, Letters I, 365.
25 In Modernism, Memory and Desire: T. S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, 2011), Gabrielle McIntire points out how, for the moderns, memory "casts its gaze to what is sealed off ... while desire pushes to the future for its realization" (I).
26 Wyndham Lewis to Ezra Pound (before July 1915), in Appendix A, Inventions of the March Hare, 305.
27 Gabrielle McIntire, in Modernism, Memory and Desire, cites evidence that Eliot sent Aiken one of these verses in 1964, a month before his death (15). I agree with McIntire's conviction that the verses are not "at odds" with Eliot's major work.
28 Letters, 3, August 25?, 1927 (660), and Geoffrey Faber's reply on August 27, 1927: "Your remark about Swift's obscenity interests me greatly.... To be obscene in Swift's manner is to separate the lees \& the wine - is it not?" (662).
29 Lyndall Gordon, The Imperfect Life of T. S. Eliot, rev. ed. (New York: Norton, 2015), 2.

30 "Marina" Collected Poems: 1909-1962 (1930), 12-13.
3 I See also Eliot's use of "horror" amounting, he said, to a mystical experience in his essay, "Cyril Tourneur" (1930) Selected Essays: 1917-1932 (1932; New York: Harcourt, 1960), 166.
32 The sepulchral city is Brussels.
33 Youth, Heart of Darkness and The End of the Tether: Three Stories (London: J. M. Dent, 1902, 1960), 152.

34 Diaries, Bodleian Library.
35 Eliot to Sydney Waterlow, Letters, I, December 19, 1921, 617.
36 Henry Eliot to his mother, December 12, 1921, Letters, I, 613.
37 Eliot to Henry Eliot, July 2, 1919, Letters, I, 370.
38 The Diary of Virginia Woolf, Volume Two, 1920-1924, ed. Anne Olivier Bell (London: Hogarth, 1978), June II, 1922, 178.
39 Quoted by Theodore Spencer in a lecture at Harvard and noted by Henry Ware Eliot. Epigraph to The Waste Land: A Facsimile.
40 McIntire, Modernism, Memory and Desire, 5.
4I Eliot in conversation with Mary Trevelyan (March 1955). Trevelyan's unpublished memoir, "The Pope of Russell Square."
42 Virginia Woolf, "The Art of Biography," The Death of the Moth and Other Essays (1940; London: Hogarth Press, 1942), repr. The Essays of Virginia Woolf, ed. Stuart Clarke, vol. VI (London: Hogarth Press, 201 I), 187.
43 Eliot to Richard Aldington, November 17, 1921, from London before leaving for the sanatorium. Letters I, 606.
