# 4 

BARRY SPURR

## Religions East and West in The Waste Land

## I

At the heart of the process of attaining religious understanding, in all belief systems, is the idea of the journey of faith. Even in those religions that prioritize the conversion experience - which occurs for the believer at a specific place and time - this moment of illumination is usually understood as a challenge to pursue the lifelong implications of what was revealed in that singular event. T. S. Eliot's wise men in "Journey of the Magi," having traveled backward through time and reached their destination at Bethlehem, realize - as one of them meditates, long afterward - what had been revealed to them there, after a protracted and difficult journey, marked the start of another arduous process: of dying to worldliness. "I should be glad of another death" (43), one of them muses, appropriately open-endedly as the poem closes. ${ }^{1}$ During the years when Eliot's Christianity was becoming publicly known he deprecated any notion that embracing belief amounted to a comfortable end rather than a daunting beginning: "it [is] rather trying to be supposed to have settled oneself in an easy chair, when one has just begun a long journey afoot," he wrote in a letter to Paul Elmer More in 1929. ${ }^{2}$

The concept - philosophical as well as religious - of the quest for the fullness of understanding, in the various ways that it might be configured, and of the formidable obstacles confronting the undertaking, particularly in an increasingly secularized, anthropocentric world, is a theme found in Eliot's earliest and latest poetry. The recurring presence of a quest narrative serves, thereby, as a warning against that common tendency in readings of his poems to make a too-sharp division between works (including The Waste Land) written before his embrace of formal Christianity in 1927, when he was baptized and confirmed, and afterward. Eliot himself repudiated the identification of a breach between his earlier and later lives and his creativity: "what appears to another person to be a change of attitude and even a recantation of former views must often appear to the

author himself rather as part of a continuous and more or less consistent development." ${ }^{3}$

From Eliot's earliest poems (and, in his pre-Christian corpus, most notably and extensively in The Waste Land), the metaphor of the quest for knowledge - both personal and universal - recurs. Repeatedly, the metaphor is revealed in terms of the dual anxiety to know truth and embody it in human lives - in the individual's life and that of the society or culture - and in the recognition that this fulfillment is at best contingent, maybe unattainable, even a delusion. So the "hollow men," in the poem of that name, journeying to Hell, look up longingly to the "perpetual star / Multifoliate rose / Of death's twilight kingdom" (63-5). This Dantean vision of the Virgin, potentially redemptive, is "The hope only / Of empty men" (66-7). That the aspiration is expressed is noteworthy, but it is a hopeless hope, given their infernal trajectory.

Earlier in Eliot's corpus, we find the quest motif introduced in J. Alfred Prufrock's monologue in the opening invitation, "Let us go" (I). Nothing less than the search for the "overwhelming question" (Io) of the meaning of human existence impels Prufrock, even if, in his self-satire, he recognizes the unlikelihood of his ability to roll the universe to this point of ultimate interrogation. The poem's imperative opening, promising a journey to enlightenment - possibly through the experience of consummated romantic love (as the poem's title seems to anticipate, until we recognize its irony) is soon compromised by a series of disappointments, ending in desolation. The length of the monologue is one of the ways in which Eliot represents, poetically, the recurring sense in his work of the protracted struggle to attain meaning and to give poetic expression to it. The Waste Land and Four Quartets are the best examples of this undertaking in his corpus, as the poet draws together varieties of lived experience with the commitment to articulate this in a language which, in the modernist way, is being constantly, inventively remade to communicate such knowledge to the poet's contemporary audience.

Eliot's search for a spiritual explanation of the "overwhelming question[s]" of human existence developed from his study of Western and Eastern philosophy as a student at Harvard; through the period of his reviewing works for learned journals, and his editing of the Criterion - where books on philosophy and religion were regularly noticed - to his acceptance of orthodox Christianity in 1927. Over this period of some twenty years we discern Eliot's process of elimination of various belief systems and, indeed, of disbelief (although he always valued robust skepticism). The student Eliot had immersed himself in the study of Eastern philosophy - for which Harvard was renowned in the early twentieth century - when he returned there,

after a year in Paris (1910-11). He took the course in Sanskrit and read the Bhagavad Gita. He studied the sacred books of Buddhism and was given, by his instructor, Charles Rockwell Lanman, the "Fable of the Thunder," containing the "DA ... DA ... DA" passages that Eliot would use in the final section of The Waste Land. Some traces of these studies are to be found as late as Four Quartets (which Eliot completed during the Second World War). But he was never a Buddhist nor the follower of any Eastern philosophy or religion. Manju Jain puts the matter succinctly when, in referring to Eliot's study of Eastern belief systems, she observes that it "gave him an alternative world view but it did not provide him with a mainstay in his search for a defining belief." ${ }^{+}$Indeed, Eliot's allusions in his poetry to Eastern philosophy and religion are striking because of their rarity, providing different perspectives, or a brief widening of vision, when they do appear, in relation to the Western philosophical, spiritual and religious sources and ideas that, increasingly, from the time of The Waste Land, dominate Eliot's poetry, his thought and his life.

# II 

The very title of The Waste Land introduces a major informing myth of the poem - that of the impotent Fisher King of fertility stories, whose land is under a curse and has been laid waste. Linking this to the Grail legend the Christian story of the cup containing the blood of Christ that had been brought to Glastonbury in England by Joseph of Arimathea - Eliot establishes, as central to the poem's meaning and structure, the notion of journeying for enlightenment and renewal, as signified by the knight's search for this holy relic. Attainment of the Grail will release the land and the people from the curse they are enduring. So the concept and motif of journeying and questing for a religious understanding of human life, with the possibility of a redemptive outcome, is at the heart of The Waste Land, in both its themes and techniques, and the ways in which they evolve. This is the reason why, among other elements of its complex character, it is a profoundly religious poem.

From this point of view, the poem's epigraph is unpromising, as the Cumaean Sybil replies to the boys' question, "What do you want?" with the despairing, "I want to die." But this leads immediately into the first section, "The Burial of the Dead," the title of which is taken directly from the liturgical order for funerals in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer. Eliot, who did not suddenly appropriate Anglicanism five years later at his baptism in 1927, but for many years before had been taking an interest in its theology, its architecture, and its rich tradition of liturgical and homiletic

language, was familiar with the Prayer Book, a lively testament of English prose-poetry, in its early modern splendor. ${ }^{5}$ Particularly, he knew that its burial service is initiated and insistently punctuated by the Christian theology of the resurrection of the body. So The Waste Land, by summoning the recollection of that liturgy - the phrases and cadences of which would have been familiar, also, to many of the poem's original readers - begins in a condition of tension between mortality (emphasized in the work's title and in its epigraph) and eternal life, the fact of death (even a yearning for it) and the possibility of redemption from death. A series of deaths unfolds in this first section - they are, as it were, corpses brought for poetic burial.

The first death that we encounter in The Waste Land is the death of nature, mediated through the reversal of the reverdie tradition in poetry, wherein springtime (April) is portrayed as the annual period of fertile renewal, but here, startlingly, as "the cruellest month" (I). Then there is the postwar death of Europe, as expressed by Marie (who reflects on the dissolution of her former aristocratic life in this period of the breaking of nations). The following bridge passage to the next kind of mortality introduces the principal metaphor of the poem, a desert landscape, bereft of life. The invocation to the "Son of man" (20) in these lines is directly biblical (the phrase is used in both testaments; in the New Testament it appears more than eighty times to refer to Christ), so the allusion introduces the Savior, although in the negative context of the speaker's knowledge only of "a heap of broken images" (22), and, what is more, of being shown "fear in a handful of dust" (30). This is a biblical reference again: to the dust from which man was created and to which he will return (Genesis 3:19). What is striking, in other words, is the irony of the invocation to the Redeemer in the course of the enumeration of images of dissolution and anxiety, rather than the resurrection hope at the heart of the Christian faith.

This leads to the death of passion and romance, where disengagement and disappointment dominate, whether in reminiscence of Richard Wagner's Tristan und Isolde or the Grail legend where the male plant, the hyacinth, has now, perversely, been appropriated by the female speaker, "the hyacinth girl" (introducing the leitmotif of sexual confusion and dysfunction that recurs in the poem). And "The Burial of the Dead" closes with two more deaths: that of prophecy, as embodied in the flawed Madame Sosostris, and that of the metropolis, in which "death had undone so many" (63). In the process, Eliot mentions, in Madame's divination from the Tarot pack, "The Hanged Man" card, which is missing. At once, the memory of the crucified Lord is summoned, but only as the reader notes his absence. As much later in the poem, when the biblical account of the events on the road to Emmaus is recalled, Eliot weaves into

the context of the Grail legend the larger story of the Passion, Death, and Resurrection of Jesus. Denial and absence may dominate such allusions, but the references are there, nonetheless, and the absent presence of their origin haunts the poem with the redemptive possibility of renewed life until its very end.

Embedded, too, in the final strophe of "The Burial of the Dead," with its evocation of the mercantile City - at that time the center of world commerce (another potential corpse for burial, within the larger corpse of London itself, and to be focused on in section IV) - is the reference to the church of Saint Mary Woolnoth, on the corner of Lombard Street and King William Street. Predating the Norman Conquest, rebuilt by William the Conqueror, patched up after the Great Fire, the church was reconstructed from 1716 by Christopher Wren's pupil, Nicholas Hawksmoor, who, over the years, built "the most original church in the City," ${ }^{6}$ with an interior of baroque elegance. It has - John Betjeman observes - a sumptuousness "markedly different from the curves and lightness of Wren." ${ }^{7}$ In his "Notes on The Waste Land," Eliot points out that the "dead sound" of the chime from Saint Mary Woolnoth, on "the final stroke of nine," was "A phenomenon which I have often noticed" (note 68). Seen by Eliot every day when he was working at Lloyds Bank, it was one of the valued City churches, a number of which, having been declared "redundant," were destined for demolition in these years. In 1926, Eliot led a hymn-chanting procession through the streets of the City, in protest at this, and his campaign was successful in preventing the atrocity.

Eliot made clear in 1921, at the very time he was drafting The Waste Land, that the essence of his appreciation of the churches was based on personal experience of the sanctuary they offered in the midst of the deadly grind of business (even as he was also drawn by their historical and aesthetic significance):

They give to the business quarter of London a beauty which its hideous banks and commercial houses have not quite defaced.... The least precious redeems some vulgar street.... The loss of these towers, to meet the eye down a grimy lane, and of these empty naves, to receive the solitary visitor at noon from the dust and tumult of Lombard Street, will be irreparable and unforgotten. ${ }^{8}$

Later, another City church, Magnus Martyr at London Bridge, by Wren himself (under construction from 1671-6), is brought into the poem at a crucial point in its religious development. Eliot noted of the church that "The interior of St. Magnus Martyr is to my mind one of the finest among Wren's interiors" (note 264). His special appreciation here may well have been combined with his recognition of its role as a leading center of the Anglo-Catholic movement in those days (as, indeed, it continues to be).

The "dead sound" of Mary Woolnoth's chime at "nine" (68) combines the time to start work with the customary time of executions in prison and the time of the archetypal execution, of Christ, at the "ninth hour." All churches are witnesses to the Resurrection, so, in tune with both death and redemption from it, which the liturgical title of this first section initially evokes, "The Burial of the Dead" draws to its close. But not without the cynical satire of resurrection to new life in the speaker's call to Stetson, seen among the City throng, in which he asks the murderer whether the corpse he buried in his garden (in the English style) has come into bloom. This whimsically diminishes, somewhat, the recurrent resurrection allusions prior to this, and the section closes with the recognition that the speaker himself belongs to the same life-denying regime as Stetson: "mon semblable" (76).

# III 

"A Game of Chess" particularizes the death of London in terms of three of its classes of citizens: upper, middle, and working-class Cockney, and includes a powerful suggestion, also, of the death of femaleness, in a sequence of variously configured fallen women. In terms of the quest motif, the elements of class and gender comprehensiveness indicate the thorough-going quality of the speaker's journey through the desiccated urban wasteland, dissecting its diverse denizens and maladies, while seeking redemption from it and them. The brilliant evocation of aristocratic femininity in the opening ino lines enacts a spectacular fall from grace by beginning in recollection of Enobarbus's description of Cleopatra, with echoes too of Belinda at her toilet in The Rape of the Lock (and rape, indeed, emerges as portrayed in the lady's boudoir, "above the antique mantel" (97)). The language declines as the affectations of appearance are stripped away to reveal the sterility and decay beneath, the ornate Shakespearean pastiche declining and dissolving into "'Jug Jug' to dirty ears" (IO3).

The bridge passage that follows transports us to another interior, instinct with despair - this time in the context of an overheard and overheated domestic dispute in which the deranged female voice is met with the disengaged responses (not in quotation marks, possibly suggesting the poet himself, with Vivien as the female speaker) of the man. The "closed car" (136) and the chess game indicate a certain level of privilege and refinement, placing this couple in the urban middle class, with the Cockneys to follow. The febrile pair are "waiting for a knock upon the door" (138). This may be death, which would be a release from such hysteria, or, as the phrase summons another biblical text, and one of the most famous of religious paintings based on it - Holman Hunt's "The Light of

the World" - Eliot is also subtly sustaining his theme of the possibility of religious redemption:

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
(Revelation 3:20) ${ }^{9}$
As is well known, the famous Pre-Raphaelite painting (no doubt seen by Eliot in one of its two versions in St. Paul's Cathedral in the City) is a deeply ambiguous, ironic work. The Savior indeed stands waiting and knocking outside, but Hunt's door, overgrown with vegetation, appears firmly, long-standingly, permanently closed. Again, the promise of Christian redemption is recalled, even proffered, only to be disappointed.

In the concluding East End pub scene of this section, fertility of a kind is surprisingly registered (for the first time in The Waste Land) in Albert's fathering of Lil's children - five, no less - but his is seen to be a callous, loveless sexuality, indifferent to Lil's welfare: she "nearly died" in childbirth with "young George" (160). Through a crude procedure - "the chemist said it would be all right" (16I) - she has aborted her latest pregnancy. Once again, life is touched with death, and female lives, congruent with the dominant theme of this section, are spoiled: even when sexual potency can be stirred, its results are not regenerating but life-denying, and the section (which opened with Cleopatra) closes in reminiscence of another Shakespearean heroine, Ophelia, and her deranged song before her suicide. Those who commit suicide, we remember, have committed the most grievous of sins, despair - in Catholic theology, the sin against the Holy Ghost - and were, in earlier times, buried outside consecrated ground, at crossroads. Eliot stimulates us here, at one of the darkest points of the poem, to question again the possibility of salvation in the culmination of a concentrated catalog of assaults upon the human body and soul, which he dramatizes poetically in this section's three scenes of human decay, with a particular female focus.

# IV 

In the title of the third section, "The Fire Sermon," the poet enlarges the frame of reference of The Waste Land beyond its English and Eurocentric perspectives and references to embrace eastern metaphysical philosophy. In doing so, he places the religious concept and form of the sermon at the heart of the poem. Here, it is the Buddha's homily against sin, the fires of lust and envy, to which Eliot alludes. This comes from the Maha-Vagga, "a central text of early Buddhism," ${ }^{10}$ equal in importance to Jesus's Sermon on the Mount in Christianity (Eliot indicates in the "Notes"). Buddha's sermon

takes up a trope used throughout the Upanishads and the Vedas and in the Gita, but one that has a particular importance to the Buddhist tradition - a trope of fire that refers both to the pain of worldly experience and to the process of purification by which that pain can be overcome. ${ }^{11}$

The significance for Eliot, as revealed throughout his poetry, of the process of purification from sin and, especially, the radical purging of fire, explains his attraction to the Buddha's teaching in this sermon, in combination with the poet's more general familiarity with and study of Eastern philosophy that he undertook during his graduate years at Harvard, when he
read selected portions of the Vedas and Upanishads in the original ... and more in translation, most likely in the famous Sacred Books of the East series edited by Max Muller. ${ }^{12}$

What follows in this section - what "Tiresias sees" - is, Eliot tells us emphatically in the "Notes," "the substance" of The Waste Land (note 218). And what is portrayed is lust in action in the copulation of the typist and the "young man carbuncular" (23I) (his elevated title, with its Miltonic inversion of substantive and Latinate epithet neatly mocking the low occasion he has initiated). This scene takes place within the setting of the death of London, registered again in the representation of the abandonment of the City and the curtailing of the poet's music, "Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song" (183), with the death rattle of bones for accompaniment, as scavenging rats creep among naked bodies. The physical gruesomeness of the scene is reminiscent of Hieronymus Bosch's hellscape; the particular focus on the loveless lovemaking, at the twilight hour, recalling that sixteenth-century artist's conception of the Inferno, not as a fantastical horror, but realistic in its detailed wickedness. The indifference of "lovely woman" to what has occurred - judged by the speaker as stooping "to folly" (253) and presenting yet another individual female fall from grace - is "automatic" (255), amoral. Although his expression is characteristically detached, Eliot's speaker is nonetheless registering a judgment, which is intensified by the subsequent plaintive lament over London, "O City city" (259) (and note the variation in capitalization, embracing both the mercantile City and the metropolis, the city, at large).

As the waxing and waning of hopelessness and hope persists, we are taken refreshingly out of doors and into the City parish of St. Magnus the Martyr in Lower Thames Street at London Bridge. This great Anglo-Catholic shrine was known as the fishermen's church, the strong smell of fish from the nearby Billingsgate Market (relocated to the Isle of Dogs in 1982) being ameliorated, within, by an equally strong aroma of incense. The fish harvest festival used to be celebrated there. In these few lines, the poet juxtaposes

the degradation of the mechanical sexuality that has gone before with a strikingly attractive scene, animated by the sounds of a mandolin and bonhomie from a bar where the "fishermen lounge at noon" (263). What is described is replete with Christian symbolism. Christ, the king of heaven, made of his fishermen-disciples, fishers of men, and, as earlier in the poem as the Son of Man, he emerges here, implicitly, as the alternative Fisher King of the poem. The fish itself, of course, is an ancient Christian symbol. Yet for all these positive intimations, the speaker nonetheless remains separated from the fishermen's musical conviviality (like Prufrock hearing from the street outside the women "Talking of Michelangelo" "In the room" within, 14, I3).

Then, as we enter the church, the colors of the classical columns in Magnus Martyr, Eliot notes, are "white and gold" (265). These are also two of the liturgical colors of Easter, the very feast of the Resurrection and new life. Commentators on The Waste Land, too readily appreciating the lavish decoration of the "Ionian" structures in the church, tend to overlook the arresting polysyllabic adjective that introduces and governs that line: "Inexplicable." The speaker is unable to discern the full meaning of this "splendour," even as he recognizes its beauty. And, immediately after, we are plunged into the Thames itself, which is sweating with "oil and tar". The technique of fragmentation, here as throughout the poem, is a powerful method for registering the pilgrim's inability to sustain, from the point of apprehension to comprehension and consummation, any salvific remedies as he moves through the wasted land. Nonetheless, the possibilities for salvation are there, clearly embedded in the poem's discourse. The Waste Land is thus not bereft of religious possibility, even hope. An "Inexplicable splendour" is preferable to none at all.

The abrupt stylistic change to a terse lyricism, punctuated by the Rhinemaidens' refrain, leads to abrupt contrasts of subject - the present, industrially polluted river; then the memory of the Elizabethan Thames, gloriously adorned by the golden royal barge of the Virgin Queen, who, in gliding past the tower, is brilliantly melded with the Virgin herself, with her litany of white and gold (recalling Magnus Martyr, too): "House of ivory ... Tower of gold." ${ }^{13}$ But then we return rudely to the present, as the succinct lyricism appropriate to virginal proprieties expands to encompass the distinctly unmaidenly Thames women who have raised their knees by Richmond and at Moorgate. The Rhinemaidens' song peters out in a tart "la la" (306) (read brazenly by Eliot in the Caedmon sound recording) as Romantic-Wagnerian and Virginal-Elizabethan conceptions are set in antithesis with the squalor of contemporary casual liaisons, whether in London or at the not-too-distant seaside resort Margate (echoing and binding with Moorgate).

The moral dimension of the religious quest is clearly represented here, and the judgments are damning, whether of the fires of lust of the Buddha's sermon or those recalled by the great patristic moralist, St. Augustine, in his Confessions (as quoted by Eliot in his "Notes"):
"to Carthage then I came, where a cauldron of unholy loves sang all about mine ears."

Eliot indicates that
The collocation of these two representatives of eastern and western asceticism, as the culmination of this part of the poem, is not an accident.
(notes 307 and 309 )
So great are the sins that they must be burned out in a refining fire. As in John Donne's famous cry for a forge-like battering and purging to "make me new," ${ }^{14}$ here, too, only a violent refinement and transformation will suffice, as figured in Eliot's repeated, stabbingly insistent "burning" with which the section closes, unpunctuated - leaving the participle and the experience unresolved, perhaps in purgatorial process.

# V 

In the Western, Christian tradition, epitaphs with monitory and often biblical inscriptions are traditionally inscribed on gravestones and memorial tablets. The fourth part of The Waste Land, following the violent imagery of the third section, is in the form of an epitaph, with a gentle rhythm and rhyme. This is a welcome respite in the poem at large. But its consoling accents are deceptive. Unlike the model it recalls (of the conventional gravestone's brief biography accompanied by monitory, but usually encouraging sentiments, typically anticipating the resurrection of the body), "Death by Water" strikingly disappoints. Consistent with the earliest section of the poem, it provides an individual corpse as representative of a larger phenomenon: Phlebas, from the great seafaring trading nation of antiquity, represents for us again the dead commercial heart of the "Unreal City." He is now released from the diurnal round of "profit and loss" (3I4) but a fortnight on from his death at sea (recalling such as Milton's Lycidas, but pointedly unlike him, not raised from a watery grave "through the dear might of him that walk'd the waves"). ${ }^{15}$ The only rising that is experienced here is the ocean's relentless rising and falling. The phrase "rose and fell" (316) is especially telling in The Waste Land where the longed-for hope of resurrection to new life goes to the very heart of the meaning of the poem, personally and universally. The myth of a drowning man seeing all of his existence passing before him is glanced at, but the most important reflection

is the speaker's noting that Phlebas, having left behind the endless "wheel" of the ship of commerce, has now replaced it, not with the peaceful stillness of eternity but with the similarly unrelenting whirlpool of the deep. The closing lines, epitaph-like, speak to those still remaining with a warning to consider Phlebas, "once handsome and tall" (32I) and now consigned to unredemptive oblivion. We note that the lines are addressed to "Gentile or Jew" (319), to all of humanity. Yet the patent absence of consolation in this section, when it is conventionally expected, paradoxically keeps alive, even heightens, the yearning for such a resolution.

# VI 

The final section of The Waste Land, "What the Thunder Said," coming after the epitaph-like fourth section, is a postlude to the laying waste of the West that the previous sections variously detail. Again, Eliot draws on Eastern legends, thereby accentuating the sense of the fragmentation and exhaustion of Occidental civilization to evoke the cultural and spiritual desuetude he is delineating. The Indian story of the Thunder in the sacred book Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad (V, I) gives this concluding section its title:

Three groups - gods, men, demons - approach the creator Prajapti and each in turn asks him to speak. To each group he answers "DA." Each group interprets this reply differently.... According to the fable, "This is what the divine voice, the Thunder, repeats when he says DA, DA, DA: 'Control yourselves; give alms; be compassionate.' "16

Climatically and climactically, Eliot introduces and then details these Eastern commands and the Western failure of response to them. After so many accounts of disappointment and failure in life, personally and in Western civilization at large, these strange imperatives from another world of culture and human story provide a bracing challenge to the wastelanders.

The rhythm and vocabulary of the poetry now are decidedly incantatory of a haunting, repetitive chanting kind that is common to both Western and Eastern religious ceremony: as in psalmody, for example. The anaphora of "After" in the opening three lines sets this in motion, as well as emphasizing, in that preposition, the pastness of the domain - its "afterward" quality which we have now entered, as the poem draws to its close. "After" is also linked to the participants, locations and events of Christ's Passion: his betrayal and arrest, the night of prayer in the Garden of Gethsemane and the "agony" of the Crucifixion. The effects of that death in the natural world are recounted in the New Testament, "reverberation" here alluding to the shaking of the earth (Matthew 27:51). Succeeding "After" in these

lines is the repetition of "and" - reminiscent of the manner of accumulating narrative in the Authorized Version of the Bible - which in turn modulates to the bald declaration that "He who was living is now dead" (328).

The principal, initial metaphor of the desert landscape (introduced in the title and particularized in the first section) is recovered now, as the poem, like the poetry itself, returns to an elemental condition, stripped bare of the complexities of sections II to IV. Such a retreat to this place where there is only rock and sand and (literally) no water indicates, in literary terms, not just life in extremis, but also, in the tradition of retreat to the desert by Christ and the so-called Desert Fathers, the possibility of spiritual renewal through such a stripping away of worldly connections. The insistent, repetitive call for water, in this verse paragraph, is a cry for both the element itself and its symbolic, sacramental function of purification - "the mystical washing away of sin," as the Prayer Book rite of Baptism has it, and which Eliot was to undergo in a few years' time. Evil spirits haunt the desert places, too, representative of Satan's temptation of the Lord in the wilderness (Luke 4:I ff.), and the lack of water becomes even more acute with "dry sterile thunder" (342) failing to bring the longed-for rain. Under a delusion stirred by heat and thirst, the speaker imagines he hears the water-dripping song of the hermit-thrush (which, Eliot writes, "I have heard in Quebec Province," note 357), and this stirs a memory of the Grail legend, where the advent of the Hermit is a token of spiritual redemption. Onomatopoeically, to make the reference even more haunting, we too hear that water-dripping song, but to no avail. Yet, as so often in the poem, such allusions, however desperate and, as here, delusional, keep alive the antithetical possibility of redemption.

In the context of this faint hope is the next paragraph's recollection of the scriptural, post-crucifixion experience of the disciples of the resurrected Lord on the road to Emmaus (Luke 24:13 ff.). Cleopas and another disciple meet Jesus but do not recognize him, and Eliot extends this nonrecognition to include a failure even to know whether the figure is a "man or a woman" (364). In scripture, the disciples discuss the sad recent events of Jesus' death and the empty tomb, but it is not until they reach Emmaus, at supper, that they recognize him, in the breaking of bread. Significantly, this famous recognition scene, so often portrayed in art, is left out of Eliot's account, with the verse paragraph concluding with a repetition of its opening query and thereby framed by it. So the redemptive consequences of the two sacraments of the Gospel - Baptism and Eucharist - are denied in these two paragraphs of this section, and the persistent theme of death without resurrection, punctuating the poem as a whole, is now even more decisively registered.

Broadening the scope of the poem and recalling its earlier allusions to the dismemberment of Europe after the Great War and the Spenglerian sense of

the decline of the West that emerged from that cataclysm, Eliot succinctly surveys nothing less than the rise and fall of civilizations, with reference to the cities on which they were centered, from antiquity to the present (as represented by London). The context is of bewilderment at the pervasive character of this phenomenon - as captured in an incantatory series of questions: "What ... Who ... What" (366-7I) - but all are summarized as "Falling towers" (373), the final adjective of the verse paragraph, "Unreal" (376), being the epithet originally associated with London. Here, it serves as the perfect keynote for the next verse paragraph, which is a surreal vision inspired, Eliot noted (B. C. Southam points out), by
a painting of the school of Hieronymus Bosch ... [with] grotesque and horrifying visions of Hell, its devils, temptations and torments. ${ }^{17}$

Animated again by the biblical incantation on "And" (used repeatedly in the Authorized Version translation to begin sequences of verses), the verse paragraph includes more images of a world turned upside down and reduced to emptiness and exhaustion. That emptiness notably characterizes the chapel, in the following lines, as the frame of reference narrows again to concentrate on the approach to the Chapel Perilous, which is the final stage in the Grail story - perilous because the knight's courage would be tested there by the horrors contained within. But Eliot's version is bereft even of these: it is "empty ... only the wind's home" (388). Harmless, it is also devoid of a challenge over which the questing knight could triumph: "Dry bones can harm no one" (390). But a cockerel is there and his call is heard, heralding morning and signaling to ghosts and spirits that, as darkness is passing, they must too. The cockerel also recalls the Passion story, as Eliot conflates, in this verse paragraph, episodes from his two principal sources, the Bible and the Grail legend. Jesus foretells that his disciple, Peter, will deny knowledge of him when he is under arrest prior to his trial:

Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.
(Mark 14:30)
Eliot is establishing the concept of three denials, which he will combine with the three commands of the Thunder as the poem draws to its close, succinctly drawing together Western and Eastern spiritual traditions.

Stunningly, at this point of desperation and dryness, rain falls - but not, it maddeningly turns out, in the wasted land: rather, a world away, over the sacred Ganges and the holy mountain Himavant in the Himalayas. And this transition to that other world leads to the three commands of the Thunder, signaled by the section's title, as the monitory voice from the

East is countered by the three failures of the wastelanders to fulfill them (as anticipated in the earlier allusions to Peter's triple denial of Jesus, when the cock crows). To the command to give ("Datta," in Sanskrit), the wastelanders have merely given in to such as lust (as detailed in several preceding episodes in the poem, especially in its third section); to the command to sympathize ("Dayadhvam"), the response has been an utter failure of empathy in the prison-like isolation of each individual, reminiscent of the pride and selfishness of Coriolanus in Shakespeare's play of that name. Finally, "Damyata" (control) reveals the regretful disappointment of mastery, as figured in imagery from yachting (a favorite pastime of the youthful Eliot). The contingency of the imagined heartfelt response to such adroit control - in a romantic setting, at sea, what is more (making the reflection even more poignant) - touches on a recurring motif in The Waste Land: the promise of fulfillment, doomed to disappointment. The absence of punctuation at the end of this last statement of failure leaves it, nonetheless, suspended in an air of irresolution, gesturing, possibly, to a future beyond the poem where such incapacity - failure of control - and the concomitant frustration of those who might have responded to such mastery may be resolved.

The Waste Land closes, Babel-like, in a lunatic confusion of tongues from which emerges, again, the haunting threefold command: "Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata" (432), precisely matched with the repeated incantatory enunciation of "Shantih" (433), the Sanskrit word that "serves as a formal ending to an Upanishad" (note 433), the poetic dialogs and commentary that follow the Vedas, the ancient Hindu scriptures. Eliot's final note tells us that the Western equivalent to this word is "The Peace which passeth understanding." This recalls not only St. Paul's words to the early Christians (Philippians 4:7) but the liturgical conclusion to several of the rites in the Book of Common Prayer. A poem richly informed by religious traditions, Western and Eastern, thus closes appropriately in the incantatory language common to the spirituality of both worlds, even as the mysterious Eastern borrowing here finishes the poem with a challenge, as daunting as it is haunting, to revive the exhausted wells of Western Christianity and, thereby, Western civilization.

# NOTES 

I "Journey of the Magi," The Complete Poems and Plays of T. S. Eliot (London: Faber and Faber, 1969). All subsequent references to Eliot's poetry are to this edition.
2 Eliot to Paul Elmer More, August 3, 1929, in T. S. Eliot, The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 4: 1928-1929, ed. Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden (London: Faber and Faber, 2013), 567 .

3 Eliot to Paul Elmer More, March 27, 1936, quoted in Kenneth Asher, T. S. Eliot and Ideology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 9.
4 Manju Jain, T. S. Eliot and American Philosophy: The Harvard Years (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), i I I.
5 For a full account of Eliot's Christian faith and practice and its influence on his work, see my Anglo-Catholic in Religion: T. S. Eliot and Christianity (Cambridge: Lutterworth, 2010).
6 [Unnamed author] London: Everyman Guide (London: David Campbell, 1993), I49.
7 The City of London Churches (Pitkin: London, 1973), 26.
8 "London Letter," The Dial, May 1921, 690-I.
9 The Holy Bible [Authorized Version, 16II], Oxford: Oxford University Press, n.d. Subsequent references to the Bible are from this edition.

10 Cleo McNelly Kearns, T. S. Eliot and Indic Traditions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 75. Kearns's study is the authoritative account of the influence of Eastern philosophy on Eliot's thought and poetry, with a reading of The Waste Land at large with reference to that influence.
II Ibid., $75-6$.
12 Ibid., 3 I.
13 Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary: "Tower of ivory, pray for us. House of gold, pray for us."
14 John Donne, Holy Sonnet XIV, "Batter my heart," line 4. The Norton Anthology of Poetry, ed., Margaret Ferguson, Mary Jo Salter, and Jon Stallworthy, 5 th ed. (New York: Norton, 2005), 320.
15 John Milton, "Lycidas," line 173. The Norton Anthology of Poetry, ed., Margaret Ferguson, Mary Jo Salter, and Jon Stallworthy, 5th ed. (New York: Norton, 2005), 414.
16 B. C. Southam, A Student's Guide to the Selected Poems of T. S. Eliot (London: Faber and Faber, 1968), 92.
17 Ibid., 9 I.
