# 5 

DAVID E. CHINITZ AND JULIA E. DANIEL

## Popular Culture

In 1970 Leslie Fiedler cited Eliot's quotation of a 1912 popular song, "That Shakespearian Rag," in part II of The Waste Land as an early evocation of jazz rhythms in high culture. Did this mean that Eliot heralded the postmodern tendency, celebrated by Fiedler, to "cross the border [and] close the gap" between high art and popular culture? ${ }^{1}$ Evidently not, for Fiedler also reiterated the longstanding critical bromide that Eliot's quotation of the song is a purely satirical maneuver. According to Fiedler, "Eliot is mocking a world he resents" (482) - the world of popular culture - and though Eliot may have been technically innovative in his adaptation of popular material, he used it only to make the same old point: that popular culture is a vapid debasement of high culture and very likely a threat to it. Such was the critical consensus from the 1930s through the end of the century: popular culture in The Waste Land "exists as an index of the degradation of the modern age." ${ }^{2}$ This view erases the complexity of Eliot's relations with popular culture and makes an interesting aspect of his work far less compelling. Eliot was neither in theory nor in practice an unalloyed opponent of popular culture and reflexive defender of autonomous high art. He was rather, as David Chinitz has demonstrated elsewhere, "productively engaged with popular culture" throughout his career, and his response to it varied considerably, depending on the cultural phenomenon in question. ${ }^{3}$

Any study of popular culture in The Waste Land must therefore take into account the specific characteristics and cultural contexts of the elements with which the poem engages. Our analysis investigates Eliot's treatment of two categories that together constitute popular culture as an object of study: the popular arts - expressive forms such as music and film - and lived culture or popular practices, including those involving popular recreation, women's fashion, and the use of automobiles. Rather than cataloging every reference to popular culture throughout The Waste Land, we offer a deep reading of key moments in "The Burial of the Dead" and "A Game of Chess" to demonstrate Eliot's nuanced and varied treatments of both the

popular arts and lived culture. This approach enables us to recuperate in detail the sociohistorical situation of iconic and diverse elements of popular culture, from jazz to perfume, and to understand how Eliot's representation of these forms comments on their wider cultural significance, whether for good or ill.

Although a thorough examination of the history and meaning of the term "popular culture" is beyond the scope of this chapter, a brief discussion will clarify its boundaries. To begin with "culture": in the "most widespread" usage of this term, as Raymond Williams notes, it refers to "the works and practices of intellectual and especially artistic activity." ${ }^{4}$ Scholars across disciplinary boundaries, however, now typically understand culture in a more expansive sense as "an entire way of life" comprising "all the characteristic activities and interests of a people." The definition just quoted is, in fact, Eliot's own, from his Notes towards the Definition of Culture. ${ }^{5}$ That book was influential in promulgating the modern, sociological understanding of culture, though Eliot has been criticized, not unjustly, both for slipping at crucial moments from this broad understanding into a narrower, more aesthetic one, and for not realizing quite how much "all the characteristic activities and interests of a people" comprehends. Eliot exemplifies his definition by mentioning "Derby Day, Henley Regatta, Cowes, the twelfth of August, a cup final, the dog races, the pin table, the dart board, Wensleydale cheese, boiled cabbage cut into sections, beetroot in vinegar, nineteenth-century Gothic churches and the music of Elgar" (IO4). While granting that "[a]ny list would be incomplete," Williams observes the "pleasant," almost romantically folkish character of Eliot's "miscellany," which is limited to "sport, food and a little art" - in short, to typical features of "English leisure." ${ }^{6} \mathrm{He}$ notes that the "'characteristic activities and interests'" of the English people would in fact "also include steelmaking, touring in motor-cars, mixed farming, the Stock Exchange, coalmining and London Transport" (234). As we will see, although Eliot's list of colorful examples neglects such seemingly pedestrian elements of lived culture, his poetry directly engages them.
"Popular culture" has been conceived historically in several incompatible ways, but here we will be concerned with culture in the broad, sociological sense just discussed - that is, with an "entire way of life," excluding only its high culture. ${ }^{7}$ Earlier studies of literature in relation to popular culture tended to analyze the representation of expressive culture or the ways in which authors draw upon structural elements or aesthetic principles found in the popular arts. Most of the scholarship that has been published to date on popular culture in Eliot's work has been of this type. The purview of literary critics has expanded in recent years, however, to include a much wider variety of cultural phenomena, from fashion to advertising to gardening

styles. Following the same trajectory, this chapter briefly surveys recent criticism on the popular arts in The Waste Land before turning to some case studies exemplifying the significant and still largely overlooked presence of lived culture in the poem. ${ }^{8}$

# Popular Arts in The Waste Land 

From the perspective of the early twenty-first century, the assumption that Eliot consistently invokes the popular arts only to disparage them appears increasingly quaint - a relic of two bygone eras in literary and cultural criticism. In the middle of the last century, when Eliot's reputation and influence were at their peak, it flattered critics' own prejudices against popular culture to range the venerated writer on their side. Beginning in the 1970s, it flattered criticism's newfound enthusiasm for popular culture, as well as its compulsive iconoclasm, to condemn Eliot as a cultural elitist. The figure of T. S. Eliot as the great champion of high culture and the implacable enemy of all else was indispensable to both generations. ${ }^{9}$ For all the adulation of the New Critics and the derision of the postmodernists, these antagonists, as far as the subject of Eliot and popular culture is concerned, now appear "folded in a single party." ${ }^{10}$

Contemporary criticism is increasingly aware that Eliot responded to the popular arts of his time in a variety of ways. The recent emergence of a serious scholarly discussion of The Waste Land and film exemplifies the current situation. Susan McCabe refers to The Waste Land as the "quintessential montage poem," positing that it employs "cutting-edge methods of cinematic dissociation," albeit for politically regressive purposes. ${ }^{11}$ Avishek Parui argues that The Waste Land "showcases a mode of seeing that combines the mythic and the cinematic," while David Trotter finds an "affinity with cinema [that] went a great deal deeper than any belated discovery of montage technique in his poems would suggest." ${ }^{12}$ Despite their differences, these critics all recognize cinema as an expressive form belonging to Eliot's world - one from which he did not, after all, thoroughly dissociate himself. None of them even feels the need to refute the old view to the contrary, though Trotter does express surprise that his contemporaries have overlooked the richness of Eliot's relations with cinema (125). The conversation takes Eliot's engagement with popular culture as a given.

The relation of The Waste Land to various genres of music has garnered most of the recent critical attention. Sebastian Knowles, Jonna Mackin, Ronald Schuchard, and David Chinitz, among others, have analyzed, from diverse points of view, the influence of the English music hall on Eliot's thought and poetry, with attention to the text and context of The Waste

Land. ${ }^{13}$ Observing the racialized provenance of several songs alluded to on the deleted first page of the poem's manuscript, Michael North finds in the minstrel show an "unexpected prototype for Eliot's experiments" with the "techniques of quotation and juxtaposition." ${ }^{14}$ Chinitz has linked these song references with an erotic melancholia running through Eliot's early poetry and reflecting a distorted version of a romantic topos common in fin-de-siècle and early twentieth-century popular song. ${ }^{15}$ These last two analyses draw freely on the text of the unedited Waste Land, arguing that it exposes impulses and associations that were always present, if camouflaged, in the published version of the poem.

As North notes, comparisons of Eliot's poem to jazz were "almost ritualistic" among both the early detractors of The Waste Land and the young American modernists who first adulated the poem. ${ }^{16}$ The relation was taken as a matter of course by both sides. Early readers' responses to the poem - and the modernist art it epitomized - generally mirrored their feelings about jazz as a cultural phenomenon; only later was the poem disentangled from and deployed against the popular. Recent work by such critics as Juan Antonio Suárez and Chinitz has analyzed the association between The Waste Land and jazz in both cultural-historical and stylistic terms. ${ }^{17}$

As even this short survey makes clear, we know too much now about Eliot's complex relations with popular music to dismiss his "Shakespeherian Rag" (128) as mere mockery. The allusion is teasing, certainly: as Edward Brunner comments, it "pretends to be scandalized by the vulgarization of Shakespeare." ${ }^{18}$ Yet it appears at almost the exact center of "A Game of Chess," the section of The Waste Land that opens by rewriting Shakespeare's Cleopatra and ends by rewriting his Ophelia. The allusion, in this context, is self-referential: the poem itself pastiches and even vulgarizes Shakespeare, making Cleopatra a neurotic middle-class Englishwoman and relocating Ophelia to a working-class pub. No doubt Eliot does this with less relish than the lyricists Gene Buck and Herman Ruby, who, with composer David Stamper, wrote "That Shakespearian Rag" for the 1912 Ziegfeld Follies. Yet his treatment of the song is clearly playful - especially in its refashioning of the original lines "That Shakespearian rag / Most intelligent, very elegant." His insertion of four consecutive exclamations of "O" and of the extra syllable in "Shakespeherian" jazzes up the song, exploiting scat and syncopation to produce energetic new rhythms. ${ }^{19}$ Chinitz has characterized Eliot's treatment of the lyric as "quizzical [and] elusively ironic" - a species of camp. ${ }^{20}$

The quotation materializes as the response of a morose, possibly shell-shocked character to his voluble, possibly hysterical wife, and, like his other "responses," appears to be thought but not spoken. Goaded by his silences, the woman harries him with the question "'Are you alive, or not?

Is there nothing in your head?'" (126). The word "But" and the lines of song follow, suggesting that there is indeed nothing there but this lyric. If any vital spark smolders in this survivor of "rats' alley" (II5), it is apparently here in the song. Brunner thus traces a thread of resilience, and even of "redemption," through this quotation to other uses of popular music in The Waste Land. ${ }^{21}$
T. Austin Graham, by contrast, finds the song's unbidden invasion of the man's mind symptomatic of the increasing pervasiveness of music in the age of mechanical reproduction ${ }^{22}$ - a theme he finds replayed in Eliot's earlier poems as well:

Eliot's use of popular song is frequently anxious and eerie, and it cannot be separated from his concerns over recording technology and mechanical methods of distributing music; from his understanding of music as an increasingly commodified product in a commercial culture; and from his sense that the human auditory process has been altered, perhaps irrevocably, by a new and ever more cluttered sonic environment. (57-8)

When Eliot's typist "puts a record on the gramophone" (256), Graham argues, she is cultivating this sonic clutter. Preferring not to think about the cheap sex in which she has just engaged - her mind permits itself only one "half-formed thought" (25I) on that subject - she deliberately fills the mental void with "canned music" (66). The typist thus exemplifies "the alienated, unsatisfied music listener" produced by "mechanized cultural abundance" (66-7). As Graham is quick to add, Eliot's misgivings are directed not at popular music itself but at its place in a new cultural economy. The two are hard to separate in practice, however, for popular music's connection to mechanization and commercialism is arguably the defining feature that separates it from antecedent and ostensibly more organic "folk" music. ${ }^{23}$ In his eulogy for the music-hall superstar Marie Lloyd, Eliot criticizes the rise of the gramophone and other technologies of mechanical reproduction for fracturing the sympathetic relationship between performer and audience. ${ }^{24}$ This rift probably accounts to a considerable extent for Eliot's ambivalence toward the popular arts to which he was otherwise obviously attracted. His response to many features of lived culture, as The Waste Land shows, was somewhat less mixed.

# Lived Culture in The Waste Land 

If The Waste Land flickers and rings with the ambivalent presence of film and music, so too is it full of the din, grit, and odor of the everyday, especially in Eliot's expansive inclusion of relatively new or recently modernized

elements of lived culture. By investigating the historical and social contexts of several of these popular practices, we seek at once to recover their unique auras of modernity and to render Eliot's specific embedded critiques of these new forms legible to contemporary readers. We begin with horoscopes and fortune telling, as seen in "The Burial of the Dead," to show that, from nearly the beginning of the poem, Eliot turns to this ancient and yet newly commoditized and regulated practice to present both the persistence and the degradation of ritual form in its modern, popular incarnations. We then move to office and automotive culture, as well as to perfumery, in "A Game of Chess." Our readings demonstrate Eliot's engagement in poetry with some of those elements of lived culture that Raymond Williams accuses him of overlooking in his prose, and they reveal that what Eliot critiques in these elements is a perceived loss of authenticity as they undergo modernization.

In crucial ways, The Waste Land explores what Eliot understood to be the lost ritual roots of the lived culture of his time, while also criticizing the threat of mechanization and commodification to cheapen both ritual practice and human practitioner. One of the most emphatically ritualistic gestures early in the poem, the reading of the tarot, comments with a mix of anxiety and assurance on the considerably popular, yet increasingly regulated, practice of consulting fortunetellers. ${ }^{25}$ Critics have read Madame Sosostris's words of warning, "One must be so careful these days" (59), as demonstrating anxiety or even paranoia about the control of sacred knowledge. While such scholarship emphasizes the mystical pedigree of this divine communication as the main reason for caution, Brian Diemert relates the air of concern surrounding the practice to the more mundane sphere of consumer habits and business regulations. New legislation sought to curtail the public's appetite for fortunes, a proclivity some thought dangerous to wartime morale, by labeling horoscopes as a form of fraud. The particular care shown by Madame Sosostris is thus symptomatic of a culture in which prophesies have devolved into black-market commodities. Delivering the horoscope by hand, as she proposes, would sidestep charges of mail fraud, though she might still be brought up on general charges of practicing divination for profit. Fortune tellers ran the risk of accidentally sharing their esoteric wisdom with undercover officers, and the Times often published arrest reports and covered the trials of these latter-day sibyls. Sosostris's concern originates thus from anxieties about authenticity and audience fundamentally shaped by new cultural attitudes and regulations: will her words reach the intended customer or will she be punished (and published) as a fraud? Is she in fact a fraud? The public figure of the fortuneteller hovered somewhere between priestess and charlatan. The scathing comments of trial judges cast fortunetelling as a nearly comedic act of deception, while the very need for prosecution testified to a

booming underground industry catering to a public who took divination seriously. Eliot's evocation of this split public sentiment toward fortune tellers contributes to The Waste Land's atmosphere of anxiety and ambiguity. Sosostris in some ways seems the charlatan, with her overblown mystical credentials standing in laughable contrast to her all-too-human cold. Yet for all her sniffling and fretting, she still manages to inhabit her role as priestess, as her "wicked pack" (46) correctly divines how the poem will unfold. As such, she stands as an example of a popular practice gone awry and yet also as a reminder of its ritual pedigree.

While Eliot's response to such popular practices as fortunetelling is mixed, his presentation of mechanized or mass-produced objects, and the cultural habits they enable, is mostly apprehensive, especially when they replace an earlier artisanal form or induce dissociation, whether between man and woman, person and place, or senses and self. Both the typist's flat and the lady's toilette in "A Game of Chess" are cluttered with such objects, from the gauche array of food in tins to the bijoux of small perfume bottles, and therefore they serve as excellent case studies in the ways Eliot critiques the lived culture that accrues around these thoroughly modern goods.

The typist episode in particular lends itself to such a study, since her profession and her flat capture the experience of everyday living for the contemporary working woman. One of the new qualities of this lifestyle was an abundance of mass-produced conveniences, like the prepackaged food, gramophone, typewriters, and taxi that situate Eliot's typist in an atmosphere of mechanized decadence. Lawrence Rainey places the typist in the context of her modern vocation, one in which young women were equated with the new technology they used, to the point of being referred to as "typewriters" as well as typists. They epitomized "an interlocking grid of new communications and storage and retrieval technologies" - a "new office culture" with which Eliot was intimately familiar during his employment at Lloyds Bank. ${ }^{26}$ Rainey also marks the rise of both popular literature featuring typists as romantic protagonists and journalistic exposés revealing the low wages, poor diets, and cramped living conditions of these working girls. Eliot plays on these conventions and social concerns in portraying his typist, who, like her literary and real-life counterparts, eats tinned food and uses her divan as a bed in her one-room flat. The lack of intimacy in the typist's sexual encounter with the clerk also occurs on a stage that precludes privacy, rendering the typist overexposed and vulnerable before she suffers his first gropes. Not only is the clerk met by piles of her undergarments on the divan, but even more of her delicates are "Out of the window perilously spread," making public her private lingerie (224). In these details, Eliot presents the very environment of the flat as one of violation and links the distress

of the scene directly to the new office culture and to the habits of living it generates far beyond the office walls.

Eliot similarly critiques new changes in British automotive culture, particularly the rise of the taxi and the closed car, which he represents as divorcing drivers and passengers from each other, their local environment, and even their sense of self. After bemoaning the gramophone's ubiquity in his tribute to Marie Lloyd, Eliot goes on to criticize a future in which "every horse has been replaced by 100 cheap motor-cars" (407-8). Eliot's nostalgia for the absent horse translates into broader concerns about automotive mechanization in the typist episode, where "the human engine waits / Like a taxi throbbing waiting" (216-17). Horse-drawn taxis still shared the road with their motorized counterparts in London in the late teens - the last license for a horse-drawn cab was granted as late as 1947 - although the trend toward replacement was already clear. The taxi became a prominent icon of modern city living, combining as it did the latest automotive developments with a uniquely urban convenience. ${ }^{27}$ Like the typist, the taxi driver became synonymous with the technology of his trade. In The Waste Land, Eliot replaces the human operator with an anthropomorphized waiting engine, effacing the presence of the driver within his idling vehicle. As with the gramophone and the typewriter, the taxi also breaks traditional chains of agency. It is a vehicle directed not by the driver but by the passenger, splitting purpose and motion, volition and capability across the back of a seat. ${ }^{28}$ If the human engine is like the waiting taxi, it is trapped in a humming stasis while caught between two lives - that of the driver and the as yet nonexistent patron. In other words, this "human engine" lacks a coherent engineer and so captures in miniature the sense of a fractured self. Ultimately, what is lost in all this mechanical throbbing, and in the new automotive culture more broadly, is the beating of a heart, whether that of the driver, the passenger, or the now defunct horse.

That Eliot laments the rise of "cheap motor-cars" in his essay on Marie Lloyd is typical of debates within the English automotive world at the time. As Rudy Koshar illustrates, English designers and motorists worried over the influence of Ford's mass-produced vehicles on their more artisanal, "low-volume production ... designed to appeal to a multiplicity of middle-class tastes and preferences." ${ }^{29}$ Eliot's anxiety about the availability of "cheap" models thus encompasses fears about class, nationality, and craftsmanship. Cars appear early on in The Waste Land, as the taciturn husband in "A Game of Chess" promises "a closed car at four" in case of rain (136). That it is only "a" car may suggest that this is also a taxi, summoned to whisk the couple away for some diversion from their tedious afternoon. However, the car's inclusion in a list of banalities used

to fill the hours reduces it to just another aspect of that daily tedium. By withholding the car's destination, Eliot adds the couple to the list of travelers in The Waste Land whose wanderings never alleviate their restlessness: where they are going does not matter, because their lives will remain the same. A crucial detail that Eliot does provide, however, is that this car is "closed." While contemporary readers might find this descriptor unremarkable, it in fact signals a recent modernization of the automobile that directly contributes to Eliot's ritualistic presentation of seasons and water in the poem. Originally, open touring cars were the playthings of the elite, who used them primarily for pleasure drives in the country. However, Ford altered these driving habits with the introduction of the closed, or hard-top, car in 1915. Ford's advertising for the closed car targeted middle-class drivers who craved comfort and conveniences, particularly preserving their clothing from the elements. ${ }^{30}$ No longer merely a diversion for sunny afternoons outside the city, driving was becoming the fashionable way to get around on any day, anywhere, and car manufacturers abroad eagerly patterned new closed vehicles on Ford's model. In "A Game of Chess," Eliot implicitly criticizes the lack of contact with the environment in the sealed-off interior of the car. In The Waste Land's parched landscape, the hope of coming rain represents the fulfillment of the fertility ritual as well as a desperately needed reinvigoration of culture. By treating the rain as a mere inconvenience easily avoided in a trendy closed car, the couple demonstrates the deadening effects of a popular automotive culture that severs people from the particulars of places and seasons.

In spite of their class differences, the cultural environments of the affluent lady in "A Game of Chess" and the typist in "The Fire Sermon" overlap in more than their shared references to automotive culture. Just as Eliot lingers over the typist's "drying combinations" (225), he pauses to describe the clutter on the woman's dressing table. Her perfume in vials mirrors the typist's food in tins, another organic product once made by hand reduced to a fabricated approximation. Amid the lady's baroque toilette can be found a variety of dainty perfume containers, whose contents disorient the senses: "In vials of ivory and coloured glass / Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes" (86-7). The very strangeness of these insidious perfumes is due in part to their synthetic nature, a recent advancement in perfumery that radically altered the cultural practices surrounding this highly sexualized and class-encoded consumer good. Eliot here specifically uses the technical term "synthetic," a word popularized in the perfume industry in the late teens with the creation of fabricated scents. Before the early 1900s, perfume was an artisanal product created by individual perfumers who hand-blended expensive

botanicals into signature aromas. These artisans carefully guarded their craft - one with a pedigree running back to ritual practices in the ancient world, where expensive tinctures made choice offerings to the gods (as well as practically masking the odor of less aromatic sacrifices). Etymologically, the word "perfume," which means "through the smoke," derives from perfume's use in rites involving burning. In "A Game of Chess," Eliot evokes perfume's ritual history as it literally contributes to the smokiness of the room. The clean breeze "That freshened from the window" (90) does nothing to alleviate the floral stench; it actually worsens the smell by "Stirring" the air (93). Perfume becomes per fume, a scented smoke that ascends to the heavens - or fails to ascend, in this case, as the aromas, combining with smoke from the candles, are caught in the room's ornate ceiling. Like the closed car, the cramped room seals its inhabitants in, leaving them to suffocate amid chemicals that have "drowned the sense in odours" (89). Another of perfume's traditional ritual applications is the anointing of the dead, and in "A Game of Chess," the lady's implied act of self-anointing adds to the funerary tone of the scene. ${ }^{31}$ In its sense-muddling manifestations throughout the overwrought room, the perfume is alternately a threatening sea, a smoldering burnt offering, and sacred oil for this act of extreme unction.

These are no ancient unguents, however, but thoroughly modern potions. In 1882, the Parisian manufacturer Houbigant produced "Fougère Royale," the first perfume that incorporated synthetics, thus moving the art of perfumery into the arena of the laboratory. ${ }^{32}$ By 1900 , the vast majority of perfumes featured synthetics in their blends, and the trade had transformed into a booming industry seemingly overnight. The use of synthetics made perfume significantly less expensive, and it soon found its way to the masses over department store counters. These perfumes enjoyed immense popularity throughout the twenties and thirties, thanks to the marriage of synthetic perfume's affordability and an expanding class of working women with disposable income, like Eliot's typist. The "vials of ivory and coloured glass" (86) were also part of the trade, as the mechanization of mould-blown glass, along with the invention of the automatic bottle-making machine in 1891, enabled perfume bottle designers, like the famous René Lalique, to create dazzling containers in bulk and at a reasonable price. ${ }^{33}$ Lalique's crystal pieces were crafted without lead, resulting in a cheaper, more malleable glass, as well as the signature milky coloring that distinguished the brand. The lady's ivory bottle in The Waste Land may refer to this white-tinted, machine-molded frosted glass, which had become massively popular. "Ivory" would then serve as an adjective in Eliot's line, one that describes the frosted finish on the bottles. Alternatively, the word may refer to a bottle made of ivory celluloid, also known as French Ivory or Ivorine. Celluloid

was patented in 1870 and soon became a ubiquitous industrial material thanks to its malleability and relative affordability. French Ivory, one of celluloid's many manifestations, was used as a pre-molded ivory, tortoiseshell, or horn replacement for many luxury and personal items that once would have been hand-etched, including billiard balls, fountain pens, umbrella handles, and perfume bottles. The lady's "ivory," now a noun, might then be one of the many popular French Ivory containers commonly used in art deco designs for perfume bottles and women's dressing table sets. The opacity of Eliot's phrase, like the ivory vial itself, makes it difficult to tell whether her table represents a mix of the old and the new, with genuine antique ivory flasks alongside glass containers from the department store, or a thoroughly modern cosmetic set made of the newest materials in the latest fashion. In either case, in the description of this fragrant still life, Eliot's readers would have recognized a changing industry that blurred the boundaries between art objects and machine-made consumer commodities.

The many scents lurking in these containers add to the atmosphere of decadent excess. Just as the interior of the room is heavily encrusted with décor, the air is saturated with the chemical approximation of fresh flowers and spices. "Unguent, powdered, or liquid" (88) refers to the different vehicles for these synthetics: a lotion, a talc-based powder, or a liquid to be daubed on the skin or atomized. To compound the effect, Eliot matches this triad of scent vehicles with a trio of disorienting effects: "troubled, confused / And drowned the sense in odours" (89). The proliferation of artificial odors not only overwhelms the speaker but also testifies to the lady's anxiety before she even speaks. Just as she barely manages to hide her terror behind the facade of conversation, she also anxiously masks the odor of her body in a cloud of store-bought aromatics. ${ }^{34}$ Much as with the gramophone and the taxi, Eliot faults this popular consumer good for the scented fog it imposes between not only the lady and the gentleman but also the lady and her bodily self. ${ }^{35}$

Eliot engages as a poet with a variety of cultural phenomena comparable to that of Raymond Williams's expansive list, interweaving expressiveness and commodification, leisure and labor, art and the everyday, to represent the texture of modernity. On the whole, The Waste Land is critical of popular culture, although, as we have seen, it draws significant distinctions as well, revealing an ambivalent warmth for the popular arts and a greater skepticism toward lived culture, with Eliot's strongest condemnation reserved for objects and practices seen as obstructing or perverting authentic experience. We conclude here by returning to the impetus behind this project: the hope that our sampling of popular culture in The Waste Land will demonstrate

the broader prospects of approaching the poem through an inclusive notion of popular culture. A great deal of work remains to be done on how Eliot portrays and comments on the lived culture of his moment particularly. The preceding discussion of perfume could be extended to cosmetic culture more broadly and its role in the lives of women who sought to make themselves "a bit smart" (142). Similarly, Beci Carver has recently analyzed the social and commercial life of lingerie by paying attention to the typist's surprisingly old-fashioned undergarments. ${ }^{36}$ Her analysis opens up the possibility of reading fashion in The Waste Land more generally, down to the silk hats and handkerchiefs. One could also explore, for instance, the gastronomical Waste Land, complete with cups of coffee, hot gammon, currants, picnics, and canned edibles, or the economic Waste Land suggested by commuters, clerks, fishmongers, loitering heirs, Smyrna merchants, and trade wars. Such scholarship will not only provide new points of entry into the poem but add to our understanding of Eliot as a commentator on and consumer of popular culture.

# NOTES 

I Leslie Fiedler, "Cross the Border - Close the Gap," A New Fiedler Reader (Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 1999), 482.
2 Jon Thompson, Fiction, Crime, and Empire (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993), 35 .

3 David E. Chinitz, T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 12-13.
4 Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976), 80.
5 T. S. Eliot, Notes towards the Definition of Culture, in Christianity and Culture (New York: Harcourt, 1968), 116, 104.
6 Raymond Williams, Culture and Society 1780-1950 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983), 234.
7 For a useful, authoritative (though not neutral) discussion of various definitions, see John Storey, Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction, 6th ed. (Harlow, Essex: Pearson, 2012), 5-I3 passim, and his Inventing Popular Culture: From Folklore to Globalization (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003). Regarding our own model, we are cognizant of the checkered history of definitions of popular culture as the "other" of high culture, which have often been deployed to denigrate the popular. No such valuation, of course, is intended or implied here. We are also keenly aware of the problematics of the high-low binary, but we trust it is clear that we are making no strong claims for it. Its function here is essentially heuristic. Critics of The Waste Land have written at length of Eliot's allusions to Dante and Ovid, while they have said little of his references to motor-cars and jazz. We begin to redress that imbalance.
8 The distinction between expressive and lived culture presents problems of its own, particularly in the way it reifies the postindustrial severance of aesthetics

from utility. However, given the aforementioned history of criticism on popular culture in The Waste Land, it does provide a useful structure for this analysis. Indeed, our attention to lived culture has the benefit of elucidating many of the aesthetic qualities of purportedly mundane and utilitarian objects and practices, like the purchasing and collecting of perfume bottles.
9 Chinitz, T. S. Eliot, $158-67$.
Io Eliot, Complete Poems and Plays, 1909-1950 (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 143. Poems will be cited hereafter parenthetically by line number.

I Susan McCabe, Cinematic Modernism: Modernist Poetry and Film (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 14, 46.
12 Avishek Parui, "'The Nerves in Patterns on a Screen': Hysteria, Hauntology and Cinema in T. S. Eliot's Early Poetry from Prufrock to The Waste Land," in Film and Literary Modernism, ed. Robert P. McParland (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2013), 103-4; David Trotter, Cinema and Modernism (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2007), 153.
13 Sebastian D. G. Knowles, "'Then You Wink the Other Eye': T. S. Eliot and the Music Hall," ANQ i i, no. 4 (1998), 20-32; Jonna Mackin, "Raising Life to a Kind of Art: Eliot and Music Hall," in T. S. Eliot's Orchestra, ed. John Xiros Cooper (New York: Garland, 2000), 49-64; Ronald Schuchard, Eliot's Dark Angel: Intersections of Life and Art (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), chapter 5; Chinitz, T. S. Eliot, 46, chapter 3.
14 Michael North, The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language, and Twentieth-Century Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 85-7.
15 David E. Chinitz, "In the Shadows: Popular Song and Eliot's Construction of Emotion," Modernism/modernity II, no. 3 (2004): 45 I-62.
16 Michael North, Reading 1922: A Return to the Scene of the Modern (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 146.
17 Juan A. Suarez, Pop Modernism: Noise and the Reinvention of the Everyday (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007), 138-9; Chinitz, T. S. Eliot, 38, $4 \mathrm{I}-9$.
I 8 Edward Brunner, "Stepping Out, Sitting In: Modern Poetry's Counterpoint with Jazz and the Blues," in The Oxford Handbook of Modern and Contemporary American Poetry, ed. Cary Nelson (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 223.

19 Ibid., 223-4; T. Austin Graham, The Great American Songbooks: Musical Texts, Modernism, and the Value of Popular Culture (New York: Oxford, 2013), 63-4.
20 Chinitz, T. S. Eliot, 49.
21 Brunner, "Stepping Out," 224-5.
22 Graham, The Great American Songbooks, 65.
23 Michael Coyle, "Popular Culture," A Companion to Modernist Poetry, ed. David E. Chinitz and Gail McDonald (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014), 8I-4.
24 Eliot, "Marie Lloyd," in Selected Essays, new edition (New York: Harcourt, 1964), 407-8.

25 Brian Diemert, "The Trials of Astrology in T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land: A Gloss on Lines 57-9," Journal of Modern Literature 22, no. I (1998), 175-81.
26 Lawrence Rainey, "Eliot among the Typists: Writing The Waste Land," Modernism/modernity 12, no. I (2005): 65. doi: 10.1353/mod.2005.0049.

27 As Malcolm Bobbitt has documented, taxis persisted as a mainstay in the London landscape despite the advent of affordable public transportation, and different companies touted the newest models to attract customers. Malcolm Bobbitt, Taxi! The Story of the London Taxi Cab (Poundbury, Dorset: Velcoe, 1998), 10-15. For more on London taxi culture, see Bill Munro, A Century of London Taxis (Ramsbury, Wiltshire: Crowood, 2005).
28 Motorized taxis shared many common elements with their horse-drawn predecessors. The driver/passenger split is of course to be found in both; however, this dynamic is compounded for Eliot by its inclusion in the mechanized environment of the car. As with "closed" cars and covered hansoms, to be discussed in this chapter, the poet sometimes casts long-established qualities as part of the modern problem.
29 Rudy Koshar, "Cars and Nations: Anglo-German Perspective on Automobility between the World Wars," in Automobilities, ed. Mike Featherstone, Nigel Thrift, and John Urry (London: Sage Publications, 2005), 130.
30 See, for example, "Ford Closed Car Advertisement" (1924), America on the Move, National Museum of American History: Transportation Collection, accessed December 4, 2013. http://amhistory.si.edu/onthemove/collection/ object_502.html.
31 Funerary applications of perfumes are various and widespread. Roy Genders traces them back to ancient Rome: "The early Romans buried their dead, but later cremation on a funeral pyre of scented woods was the custom: the bones and ashes were gathered up and mixed with perfumes before being placed in a decorative urn." Perfume through the Ages (New York: Putman, 1972), 86.
32 There is some debate about how to date the emergence of synthetic perfume. In 1855 , essence of Mirbane was first synthesized, soon followed by Bitter Almond in 1869 and Vanillin in 1875 . Perfumers began experimenting with these chemicals before officially introducing them to the market, but most scholars consider the unveiling of Fougère Royale the watershed moment for synthetic perfumery. Our account here is especially indebted to Aytoun Ellis, The Essence of Beauty: A History of Perfume and Cosmetics (New York: MacMillan, 1960), and Julia Muller, The H\&R Book of Perfume (London: Johnson, 1984). For more on the social history and production of perfume, see Genders, Perfume.
33 The feminine, floral, and highly organic styles of early Art Nouveau bottles in the teens were soon overshadowed by sleeker, more urban Art Deco designs in the twenties, such as Lentheric's architectural container for "Miracle" and Jean Patou's minimalist bottle and packaging for "Le Sien." On the development of bottle styles and perfume marketing, see Jacquelyne Y. Jones North, Commercial Perfume Bottles (Westchester, PA: Schiffer, 1987).
34 As Maud Ellmann notes, the deleted Fresca episode of The Waste Land manuscript makes a cruder but essentially similar suggestion in the lines "Odours, confected by the cunning French, / Disguise the good old hearty female stench" (40-1). Ellmann, "Eliot's Abjection," in Abjection, Melancholia, and Love: The Work of Julia Kristeva, ed. John Fletcher and Andrew Benjamin (New York: Routledge, 1990), 194-5; Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 39.

35 As Laura Frost has shown in The Problem with Pleasure: Modernism and its Discontents (New York: Columbia University Press, 2013), 37-42, Eliot's concerns were not a merely personal preoccupation: the moral implications of perfume had been a matter of concern for social thinkers since the 1880 os.
36 Beci Carver, Granular Modernism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), I26-8.

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107279612.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
