# 6 

MICHAEL LEVENSON

## Form, Voice, and the Avant-Garde

Consider, to begin, the late essay on "The Three Voices of Poetry," where Eliot makes some brisk distinctions. The first voice is that "of the poet talking to himself - or to nobody;" the second is "the poet addressing an audience, whether large or small;" and the third "is the voice of the poet when he attempts to create a dramatic character speaking in verse." ${ }^{1}$ Eliot, laying out a taxonomy of possibilities, presents voice as address: the directedness of speech toward an audience or through a character, inside or outside the work, real or fictional. Such taxonomy has been a temptation, but the concept of voice remains notoriously elusive, largely because it bears the burden of so many interests. It gives a name for identity (as in "finding one's own voice"), but also indicates the mode of an entire work or performance (as in "the voice of Joseph Conrad's The Secret Agent"). It can take a divine referent: "the voice of God;" but just as often a political one: "the voice of the people." Use of the term, moreover, remains suspended between figural and literal meanings; a "strong voice," for instance, suggests both force of character and vibrant pitch. James Fenton insists on the social and material effects of audibility, characterizing poetry as "language to which a special emphasis has been given," by relying on such means as "raising the voice in order to be heard above the crowd; raising the voice in order to demonstrate its beauty and power; chanting the words; reciting the words rhythmically; punctuating the units of speech (what will become the lines of the poem) with rhymes; setting the words to tunes; or setting the words to tunes and singing them in unison, as in a drinking song." ${ }^{2}$ All of these registers pertain to the workings of The Waste Land. We only have to recall the early title ("He Do the Police in Different Voices" - Charles Dickens's fond description of Sloppy in Our Mutual Friend) - to meet the range of implications, including performance (the doing), polyphony (the differences), and physicality (the voices Sloppy enunciates with gusto). Our subject being form, voice, and the avant-garde, it will be good to recognize at the outset that voice not

only assumes form, but can also be form-disturbing and form-breaking, and that as Eliot pondered and practiced these effects, he located his place within the literary avant-garde more persistently and more variously than we have inclined to suppose.

# I 

The turn of the twentieth century was a moment of noisy modernity. The rise of a mass journalism, often given to hectoring pronouncement; the high-toned speechifying of bourgeois society; the public demands of suffragettes and the working class; the chug of urban transport - all bear on lyric tone. Eliot reflected on the audible pressures of new technologies: "Perhaps the conditions of modern life (think how large a part is now played in our sensory life by the internal combustion engine) have altered our rhythms." ${ }^{3}$ Rhythm was indeed decisive to his early impetus toward poetry, but no more than the experiments in tone. Eliot's encounter with the first significant literary avant-garde, the French poets who came to be called Symbolists, was for him, unlike for W.B. Yeats, an encounter with tonal transformation in the age of modern noise. His celebrated discovery of Arthur Symons's early study, The Symbolist Movement in Modern Poetry, has rightly been called decisive. It led him not only to two generations of risk-taking poets - Jules Laforgue initially most important among them - it also opened unsuspected dimensions of voicing. If the story of Eliot's turn to Laforgue is well known, less so is the mediating text from Symons, which was itself an exercise in the naming of voices. For Laforgue, Symons writes,

Verse and prose are alike a kind of travesty, making subtle use of colloquialism, slang, neologism, technical terms, for their allusive, their factitious, their reflected meanings, with which one can play, very seriously. The verse is alert, troubled, swaying, deliberately uncertain, hating rhetoric so piously that it prefers, and finds its piquancy in, the ridiculously obvious. ${ }^{4}$
Symons evokes the "ironical lilt" of the arch manner, its "icy ecstasy," "artificial through its extreme naturalness," refusing "the old cadences, the old eloquence" (298). The strain in the critical language is revealing. The mobility of Laforgue's manner tests Symons's ability to describe it: the rapid shift from detachment to despair, from chill irony to chastened earnestness. It is this aspect of poetic voicing, the instability of its tonalities, that taxonomies have often resisted or avoided, including Eliot's own taxonomy. To return to Symons is to summon back a moment of opportune unsettlement, with Pater as its epitome, that saw the evocation of fugitive tones as retreat in the service of a literary advance, at once burden and glory.

The Waste Land consummates more than ten years of Eliot's labor in voice. The extent of its challenge can be broached by setting its beginnings against its endings, that is, the opening of each of the five sections against their closing lines. These openings are, in each case, descriptive utterances, making no overt reference to a speaker.

April is the cruellest month, breeding ( I )
The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,
Glowed on the marble $(77-8)$
The river's tent is broken (173)
Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls (312-13)
After the torchlight red on sweaty faces (322)
Each declaration points outward toward a condition of the world - a move that reveals an aspect of voicing in The Waste Land too easily overlooked. Here the poem accepts a documentary vocation, where speech becomes the assertion of fact through simple syntax and vocabulary, and scenes are surveyed from an apparently detached and all-seeing vantage point. Already, however, the dislocations of perspective show themselves. The startling word "cruellest," the simile of the "burnished throne," the metaphor of the "river's tent" - these suggest a break in the neutrality of view, the stirring of a manner or attitude. They prepare for a contrast that becomes clearest when we set these opening lines against those closing each section.
"You! hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, - mon frère!" (76)
Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night. (172)
O Lord Thou pluckest
burning (310-II)
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you. (32I)
Shantih shantih shantih (433)
The sections close with forcefully accented speech, no longer oriented toward description, but emitted now from a discernible location and an angle of vision. This movement from the documentary eye to a strong personal statement marks a broad track of voicing through the poem. Patience in laying out a scene - a dressing room, a spring or autumn landscape, a drowning - gives way to the outburst of an individual cry, or warning, or prayer. Moreover, these transitions repeat locally within the five sections, yielding a tonal rhythm that repeatedly passes from gnomic generality to ardent utterance.

Much of the critical argument over The Waste Land - whether to take it as a work of political and social engagement or as the confession of a traumatized émigré - turns on the emphasis given to these inflections. But it is worth stressing that between the distant poles sound modulated middle tones, where neutrality transforms into the signature accents of individuality. The rotund sounds of the first three lines change force, as well as rhythm, from the moment the first-person plural pronoun enters at line five, and the sounds continue to alter as the plural becomes singular, becomes Marie.
"Subjectivity in Language" is Émile Benveniste's phrase, ${ }^{5}$ intended to capture the capacity of rule-governed discourse to organize around personhood. Words can circulate as detached and disinterested signs, but then they become assimilated to the interests and lived experience of individuals. The second stanza of the poem begins with biblical magniloquence, which then resolves into the prophetic "I" who "will show you fear in a handful of dust" (30) - an "I" that transmutes into the dramatic my ("Mein") of Richard Wagner's Tristan und Isolde, only to turn again into the personal memory of a living speaker. The poem thus repeatedly raises the stakes for subjectivity in tone, first by moving from the objectivity of language into the realm of personal utterance, and then by shifting among persons, so that intonations that suggest one (kind of) character modulate into suggestions of another. Often we might better speak of "voicing" rather than "voice" in the poem, since the acts of speech pass too quickly to establish any stable personhood.

The shifting scenes in The Waste Land have typically been described in terms of montage. Here the cinema has been the leading model, especially the cinema of Sergei Eisenstein, with its methods of assemblage built upon quick cutting among points of view. But an advantage in listening to the voices in the poem is that they give an alternative to visual metaphors, which imply cleaner outlines than the poem in fact preserves. The overlapping reverberations and interpenetrating echoes display the indeterminacy of boundaries around persons, a point that Eliot famously emphasizes in his annotation on "character" in The Waste Land: "Just as the one-eyed merchant, seller of currants, melts into the Phoenician Sailor, and the latter is not wholly distinct from Ferdinand Prince of Naples, so all the women are one woman, and the two sexes meet in Tiresias" (note 218). The trope of "melt[ing] into" fits the pattern of interfering waves of speech.

Furthermore, voice often emits its sound only through mediating allusion or direct quotation. When the poem summons Edmund Spenser near the opening of "The Fire Sermon" with its apostrophe to "Sweet Thames" (176), it willfully confuses the relation between speech and speaker. The line evokes the occasion and the music of "Prothalamion," but it also expresses The Waste Land's contemporary concern with the loss of innocence before the predations of

moneyed sexuality. The "I" that stands inside Spenser's line must find connection to the series of "I" utterances before and after. "The Fire Sermon" also ends by borrowing its "I"s from earlier texts, in this case from Augustine and the Buddha, who not only preach horror at the spiritual failures in our sexuality, but who also bring the poem's compounding of voices to perhaps its highest pitch. Like the "I" extracted from Spenser's "Prothalamion," Augustine's "I" ("To Carthage then I came," 307) is at once a narrative pivot in Eliot's poem and a sign pointing back to its source in the Confessions. Because The Waste Land relies so heavily on quoted speech with the first-person pronoun, the force of the utterance is brought into question. What makes the issue pointed is that the poem includes other "I" utterances that exist outside the network of quotations and that convey a tone of desperate immediacy. "I was neither / Living nor dead" (39-40) and "I have heard the key / Turn in the door once and turn once only" (4I I-I2) imply accents of direct speech. An emphasis on these phrases leads to a view of the poem as an anguished confession.

The difficulty is that the apparently direct utterances merge ("melt into") the quoted speeches, so that the ring of authenticity becomes only one style among many. Eliot thus prefigures themes within the sociolinguistics of Mikhail Bakhtin - in particular the saturation of all speech by the inherited and authoritative tones of the past. But whereas Bakhtin enshrines forms of resistance to the dominant conventions that weigh heavily on language, Eliot appropriates, rather than resists, convention. ${ }^{6}$ He makes a resource of the unsteady relation between speech in the putative present of modern London and the echoes that vie to say "I." The effect is to create a theatrical aura around even the most searing moments of outcry ("I think we are in rats' alley," II5) - a moment often interpreted as a direct reference to the horrors of trench warfare during World War I.

The poem, it should be clear, distributes its voicing over a wide range of discrete speech acts: interrogation ("'Has it begun to sprout?'" 72), demand ("'Think,'" II4), wish ("your heart would have responded," 420), apology ("I can't help it," I 58 ). But the central act of speech is testimony. Repeatedly, throughout the poem, characters turn back to their past, distant or near, and testify to loss, glimpsed possibility, and failure ("And I was frightened," I 5; "I knew nothing," 40; "'Well now that's done: and I'm glad it's over,'" 252; "These fragments I have shored against my ruins," 430). Centrally, these acts of retrospection and witness derive from sexual violence. The most propulsive voicing in The Waste Land is not human voicing at all, but the "inviolable voice" of Philomel, crying as the nightingale (Ior). Broached briefly in "A Game of Chess," the scene of violence unfolds at the end of "The Fire Sermon," where the successive speeches of the Thames-Maidens give the debased fulfillment of the motif. The first of

them gives the austere brevity of weary testimony: "By Richmond I raised my knees/ Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe" (294-5).

Not passively to endure the degradation of sexual victimage, but to convert it into words and to achieve the dignity of speech after trauma this is Philomel's example. Taken up again by many figures, it stands as the primal voicing of the poem.

# II 

Imagism, devised and promoted by Ezra Pound, gave Eliot his first encounter with a living avant-garde. The movement's early famous proposals were terse and polemical, intended to transform the course of modern verse by revising the root elements of lyric style. "Direct treatment of the 'thing' whether subjective or objective;" " "Go in fear of abstractions" (5); "Use no superfluous word" (4). The result would be a purified voice, free from the taint of "rhetoric" (the curse of the nineteenth century), capable of producing the rigorous and bounded Image: "an intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time" (4). Energy being the central virtue, Pound calls for the "sudden liberation" poetry will achieve when it overcomes rhetoric.

Eliot appeared on the London scene after these doctrines had been elaborated. As Pound admiringly noted, he had already "modernized himself" most notably through reading, and listening to, the poetry of Laforgue. But while Eliot shared a close collaboration with Pound during the next decade, including of course the collaboration on The Waste Land, he kept apart from the program of Imagism, which in 1914-15 transformed to the program of Vorticism. He accepted the value of energy (his preferred term being "intensity" $)^{8}$ but he saw it, not as present in a single autonomous image, but as the outcome of a situation, dramatic and narrative. Not the image but the scene gives the context in which Eliot's voices sound. "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" and "Portrait of a Lady" lay out the early versions, which stage personal relations within carefully designed spaces, offering confined and decorated interiors as the fit arenas for uttered agony. What Eliot took from the Elizabethans, as well as from Robert Browning, was the resource of dramatic context. The Waste Land is the culmination of this subtle practice: it offers, not discrete images, but a series of small-scale scenarios. Marie, Madame Sosostris, the typist, the hyacinth girl, the ThamesMaidens, all live within dramatic plots that shadow forth - briefly but just long enough to evoke a narrative that must arrive in spoken utterance.

The speech of women, we have seen, epitomized by the cry of Philomel, constitutes an originary voicing in The Waste Land. And the primal failures of sexuality, its inhibitions as well as its violence, are the recurrent topic

of these micro-scenarios. Women who have been stymied and degraded ("It's them pills I took, to bring it off," I59), or trapped in empty erotic tedium ("that's done," 252), or lost within marriage ("'My nerves are bad to-night,'" III) speak within the pattern Eliot articulates in the Hamlet essay; that is, as if their words were "automatically released" by the brief narrative sequences that contain them. The references to past texts and episodes prepare the scene for the moments of cry and call; tradition provides an orchestral surrounding for the searing solitary voices.

# III 

Tradition lengthens in one dimension, collecting sounds of the past, even the far distant past, while the city extends horizontally, mixing human voices with other sounds of modernity: the traffic, the crowd, the gramophone. In this latter aspect, Eliot's new work stands in revealing analogy to the experiments of Guillaume Apollinaire in Paris, which he had been recently reading, with their own scenic miniatures placed within a mobile urban panorama. Apollinaire's poem "Hôtels" from the volume Alcools begins,

La chambre est veuve
Chacun pour soi ...
Le patron doute
Payera-t-on
Je tourne en route
Comme un toton
Le bruit des fiacres
Mon voisin laid ${ }^{10}$
("The room's available / To each his own / ... The owner doubts / You'll pay / I spin round / Like a little top// The carriage noise / My ugly neighbor"; my translation).

Eliot's work often comes close to Apollinaire's open form, with its quick-breathing short lines and its continually shifting gaze, its responsiveness to noise as ineliminable in any scene, and its intense consciousness of the separate human atoms that compose the urban crowd. Walter Benjamin is the indispensable theorist of this situation of modernity, the sudden decomposition of the crowd into its particulars, the recognition of the "one" amid "so many," each with a voice of its own (like the "demotic French" of Mr. Eugenides, 212). ${ }^{12}$ As Benjamin saw, and as Eliot and Apollinaire reimagined, the metropolis is an ongoing transaction between bounded containers (rooms and bodies) and the unbounded spaces (crowds, scents, and spectacles) that wash against them. Voice and noise make the connecting medium. They

give the sound of the unsleeping urban community but also that of separate persons, testifying to singular histories. "Maintenant," writes Apollinaire, "tu marches dans Paris tout seul parmi la foule / Des troupeaux d'autobus mugissants près de toi roulent." ("Now you walk in Paris alone among the crowd / Herds of lowing buses roll past you," my translation). ${ }^{12}$ At the end of "The Burial of the Dead," Eliot conjures the scene in this way: "There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying: 'Stetson!'" (69).

This last line suggests the still more disruptive turn that The Waste Land will take. Even as the poem, like Apollinaire's "Zone," accepts the values of density and velocity, it disbelieves in the reciprocity of voice. The speaker hails Stetson, but no voice replies. Indeed the absence of dialogue must stand as one of the signal formal aspects of the poem. Conditions of exchange are prepared: a speaker turns toward an auditor, utters resonant words, which elicit no (overt) response. Most often, the listener never comes into view, but sometimes the failure of contact is heightened, as in the so-called nerves dialogue in "A Game of Chess," by the gap between thought and speech with the repetition of "nothing ... Nothing ... nothing" (I22-6). The single example of audible dialogue occurs in the pub sequence at the end of the section, but even it appears only through the resources of soliloquy. "I" speaking in the present records a conversation with "Lil" in the past, and in so doing, transforms exchange into testimony - almost as a formal seal on the dominance of monologue.

As strong as any formal principle in the poem is the asymmetry of these monologic voices. The Waste Land represents speech on more than one level, in line with Eliot's early principle that "life goes on different planes." ${ }^{13}$ The poem's "characters," especially its women, remain caught within the trammels of sexual violence and traumatic testimony. But the voice that moves among their plights enjoys freedom from their necessities. At telling moments, the register changes fundamentally, as a speaking voice detaches itself from the noise below. For instance, the exclamation at the end of "The Burial of the Dead" -
'You! hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, - mon frère!' (76)

- breaks the frame of the literary work. It does so, first, through a direct quotation from Charles Baudelaire that brings us into another poem, and then uses its source to address the reader. We are expelled from The Waste Land, forced into consciousness of our relation to text and writer. Among "The Three Voices of Poetry," Eliot distinguishes the voice of character from the voice of the poet who addresses the audience. In making that transition here, the poem moves onto another level of discourse, where we are no longer asked to inhabit a text but to take up an attitude toward it.
"These fragments I have shored against my ruins" (430) - the radiant utterance not only names a desperation and a resolve; it also assesses the

poem to which it belongs. It stands out as an act of commentary wrested from the din of other voices, a meta-reflection that has never ceased to influence how the poem is read. As such, it belongs alongside the other grandly voiced meta-reflection, the speech of Tiresias in "The Fire Sermon."

I Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest -
I too awaited the expected guest (228-30)
"I Tiresias" is pronoun and proper name, a voice of self-consciousness striving to articulate itself within a world of inarticulate impulse. The typist and the clerk are carried to their hollow clutching by the evening hour that impels them, while the task of speech for Tiresias is to see, to foresuffer, to foretell, in order to ascend from such blind experience to knowledge. Eliot's note articulates the difficult intention: "Tiresias, although a mere spectator and not indeed a 'character,' is yet the most important personage in the poem, uniting all the rest ... the two sexes meet in Tiresias. What Tiresias sees, in fact, is the substance of the poem" (218).

The thought is persistent in Eliot of the named figure who cannot be contained by the category of character. Years later, in reflecting on The Family Reunion, he wrote of moments when his actors had to speak "beyond character:" "the speakers have to be presented as falling into a trancelike state in order to speak" their lines. ${ }^{14}$ This different (higher) level brings a different voice: solemn, incantatory. In place of desperation ("Speak") or depression ("glad it's over") or scorn ("hypocrite lecteur"), there arrives Tiresias's tone of weary vision and acceptance, the equanimity of inevitability. But an unsettling challenge of the poem is its refusal to sustain the voices of recognition. The Waste Land breaks its frame only to return to it. Tiresias appears at the center of the central section, but once he has spoken, the poetry returns to the "characters," who struggle as before. The incantatory voice delivers its wisdom and then recedes. Yet, the force of incantation appears in another form, in lines that Eliot would soon describe as the only "good lines" in the poem ("The rest is ephemeral"). ${ }^{15}$ These belong to the "'water-dripping song'" (Eliot's note 357) of part V: "If there were water we should stop and drink / Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think" (335-6). The "we" subject of these late lines gives voice to desire as it takes on the simplicity of need - need beyond the city and its modernity. Much of its haunting force is that it no longer emanates from individuals, angular in their separately coiled desires, but from a shared simple need for water.

From early in his critical career, Eliot engaged nervously with the plays of Maurice Maeterlinck, which stood in the early years of the twentieth century as triumphs of Symbolist drama. In the late essay "Poetry and Drama,"

he refers to the plays "so much admired in my youth, and now hardly even read, by Maeterlinck" (82). Two essays from The Sacred Wood had acknowledged the playwright's prominence, even as they deride him for straining at the limits of language: "Some writers appear to believe that emotions gain in intensity through being inarticulate." ${ }^{16}$ Yet, Eliot's "intensity" in part V owes a significant debt to the precedent of Maeterlinck's experiments at a slightly earlier stage in the history of the avant-garde. Here are lines from The Blind, marking the characters' dawning recognition that they are lost and abandoned. Although they have not yet realized the fact, the priest who has led them on an excursion to a forest has died in their midst. They begin to speak into the dark.

SECOND MAN BLIND FROM BIRTH
I hear nothing coming.
THIRD MAN BLIND FROM BIRTH
It is time to go back to the Asylum.
FIRST MAN BLIND FROM BIRTH
We ought to find out where we are.
SECOND MAN BLIND FROM BIRTH
It has grown cold since he left.
FIRST MAN BLIND FROM BIRTH
We ought to find out where we are!
VERY OLD BLIND MAN
Does any one know where we are? ${ }^{17}$
The play sustains this plaintive chant, which, for all of Eliot's published disdain, leaves a strong tonal mark on The Waste Land, as on "The Hollow Men" a few years later. One of the most striking turns in the poem is the emergence of a Maeterlinckian "we" near its end, the plural pronoun through which separate selves testify to a common predicament. It stands beyond the small-scale "we" of personal relatedness, as in Marie's "when we were children" ( 13 ) or the use in the nerves-dialogue: "I think we are in rats' alley" (I 15 ). In part V, "we" has become fully transpersonal. ${ }^{18}$ No one can retreat from its inclusive voice.

DA
Datta: what have we given?
My friend, blood shaking my heart
The awful daring of a moment's surrender
Which an age of prudence can never retract
By this, and this only, we have existed (400-5)

As in the water-dripping song, the passage evokes the shared agony, invisible beneath the apparatus of modernity. We are told that the wound cannot be found in our obituaries or memories. Where then is it? The poetry will not directly say, no more than it can name the feeling behind the search for water. Eliot criticized Maeterlinck, as he did the Shakespeare of Hamlet, for summoning "the emotion which cannot be expressed" ("'Rhetoric'" 84), but this is the risk that The Waste Land accepts, as it approaches conclusion. The voice of the first-person plural takes on the sonorities of Symbolism, less now the Symbolism of voice-changing Laforgue and more that of Stéphane Mallarmé, who inspired both Maeterlinck and Eliot to exploit the resources of indeterminacy. In the last part of The Waste Land, the poem leaves the city, enters an uncertain landscape, and assumes the voice of Symbolist inquiry into signs without referents.

Who is the third who walks always beside you? (359)
What is that sound high in the air (366)

# IV 

This portentous voice, however, contends with another, a more recent sound that Eliot also heard with suspicion and interest, namely the noise of Dada. Within the succession of movements that flared during the pre-war and wartime years - cubism, futurism, vorticism, expressionism - dadaism stands out as a belated eruption resisting both the violent world and its avant-garde predecessors. For the young artists who gathered in Zurich in 1916, the pre-war avant-garde was naively utopian. Their only radical gesture was to give up the high ambition to transform the world through art. Meaning is a dangerous daydream. Expression is a ruse. ${ }^{19}$ In their place should stand the exuberance of non-sense and antic gesture - as in Hugo Ball's work of 1916, "Karawane," which makes a new language out of old sounds and whose first lines are these:
jolifanto bambla ô falli bambla
großiga m'pfa habla horem
égiga goramen
higo bloiko russula huju ${ }^{20}$
Eliot encountered Dada in its Parisian incarnation, and in the spring of that gestating year 1921 he published an essay entitled "The Lesson of Baudelaire" in Wyndham Lewis's new journal, The Tyro. A brisk effort to rewrite the responsibilities of modern literary voice, it begins with a glance of disdain at "certain intellectual activities across the Channel, which at the moment appear to take the place of poetry in the life of Paris." ${ }^{21}$ But Eliot immediately acknowledges that those on his side of the channel must

develop "an intelligent point of view" toward the events (4). Dada, he writes, is distinctly French; it cannot be "directly applicable in London," because it is the product of a small public "formidably well instructed in its own literary history, erudite and stuffed with tradition to the point of bursting" (4). These phrases, however, might equally serve as a description of Eliot's own small milieu, as of the poem that would soon startle it.

The argument of the brief essay is that the test of art "depends upon the extent to which it is a moral criticism" (4). The noises of Dada must be measured against the precedent of Baudelaire, who saw that what mattered was "the problem of good and evil." Indeed, Eliot concludes by quoting the line that will close part I of The Waste Land: "Vous, hypocrite lecteur" (4). The short text is long enough to show Eliot's half-reluctant attentiveness to dadaism, much as his reading of Jean Epstein's La Poésie d'aujourd'hui shows his close awareness of French avant-garde poetry. ${ }^{22}$ These recognitions belong alongside another, namely, his fascination with the latest turn in James Joyce's Ulysses.

In the spring of the year, Joyce had sent Eliot drafts of three late episodes: "Oxen of the Sun," "Circe," and "Eumaeus." In the letter accompanying their return, Eliot described the new work as "superb - especially the Descent into Hell ["Circe"], which is stupendous.... I wish, for my own sake, that I had not read it." ${ }^{23}$ All of Ulysses belongs within the history of avant-garde tonality, but the late chapters hold a special place. As Joyce approached the end, he became increasingly aware of the brazen experiments of the young and, it seems clear, inspired by their radicalism. "Circe," in its gestural theatricality and psycho-dramatics - the shattering of the lamp as Stephen confronts his dead mother, Bloom reduced to masochistic groveling as he becomes a female body - has been seen as Joyce's strong rereading of expressionist drama. The connection is important. But a fuller account brings Joyce in relation to Dada. In mid-1920 he wrote teasingly to his brother Stanislaus, asking him to deny the rumor "That I founded in Zurich the Dadaist movement which is now exciting Paris." ${ }^{24}$ The tone registers Joyce's distance, but also his interest, and without denying the "expressionism" of "Circe," we might better recognize the dadaist stimulus behind its wilder performances. The indifference to fine writing or to decorum of any kind, the comic excess (in speech, sex, and violence), the assault on readerly norms and tastes, the extravagant play with improbability - the talking soap, the camel that plucks a mango, the End of the World as an octopus in a kilt - these must be seen as part of the Paris Dada carnival of 1920-2 I that Joyce watched with detachment and curiosity. Joyce was no dadaist, merely a ruthless exploiter of its tactics, especially its willingness to release literary voice to the broadest, loudest register.

To follow Eliot's relation to Dada, then, we need to move by way of the apparent detour that is Joyce. The example of Ulysses's later episodes, the "stupendous" "Circe" above all, brought conviction to the Dada voicings in The Waste Land. First among them is the phoneme "Da" itself, the thrice-repeated sound of the thunder in part V, which in 1921-2 (and in the context of Eliot's meditations in The Tyro) cannot have failed to evoke dadaism. If "The Lesson of Baudelaire" is that the avant-garde will matter only insofar as it offers "moral criticism," the poem enacts this thought by following the bare sound of "Da" with the stern injunctions of a religious ethics: Give, Sympathize, and Control. Yet these telling instances also suggest some of the radically disruptive aspects of voice in the poem: the way moral criticism is always subsequent to sounds that shatter meaning. What Eliot took from his encounter with Dada was a capacity to listen to noise.
"Fragments" remains our usual name, as it was Eliot's name, for the elements that compose The Waste Land. But the word should not suggest that "wholes" are merely waiting to reassemble. The provocation of the eruptive sounds is immediate: they strike the ear (by way of the eye) before there is time for interpretation, and the velocity of the rhythms means that each yields to the next without the security of context, or the comfort of a consistent tone. The dadaist sound is precisely one that cannot be predicted by the sound that came before - a condition that unsettles the entire poem (in the "Shakespeherian Rag" (128), in Augustine and the Buddha, in the cry of Philomel), and then, aggressively, in these late lines:

London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina
Quando fiam uti chelidon - O swallow swallow
Le Prince d'Aquitaine à la tour abolie (426-9)
Before and after these lines, the poem again gives the promise of meta-commentary ("Shall I at least set my lands in order?" 425; "These fragments I have shored against my ruins," 430), and it ends with words of "moral criticism:" the ethics of thunder and "shantih." This is what Eliot has drawn from Baudelaire, that poetry must encounter good and evil. Yet the ethical frame around the quoted lines cannot disarm their challenge. The different languages create their own violent dislocation of sound, and the quoted texts impose a variety of rhythms. A near century of criticism has not been able to enclose these provocations within a circle of interpretation: the sounds keep leaking out. Among the many tonalities, our last two ring out strongly and competitively at the end: the insurgent dadaist voice of non- or

not-yet meaning, and the Symbolist voice that draws upon Maeterlinck, Mallarmé, and, decisively, Baudelaire, to evoke a transpersonal realm of moral extremity. These voices meet but never harmonize. The poem is noisy to its end: murmuring, chanting, reciting, laughing, accusing, praying.

# NOTES 

I T.S.Eliot, "The Three Voices of Poetry," On Poetry and Poets (New York: Noonday Press, Farrar Straus \& Giroux, 1957), 96.
2 James Fenton, An Introduction to Poetry (London: Penguin, 2002), 10.
3 Eliot, "Introduction" to Charlotte Eliot, Savonarola: A Dramatic Poem (London: R. Cobden-Sanderson, 1926), xi.
4 Arthur Symons, The Symbolist Movement in Literature (New York: E. P. Dutton: 1919), 297.

5 Emile Benveniste, Problems in General Linguistics, trans. Mary Elizabeth Meek (Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press, 1971), 223-30.
6 M.M.Bakhtin, "Discourse in the Novel," The Dialogical Imagination, ed. Michael Holquist, trans. Carol Emerson and Michael Holquist (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981).
7 Ezra Pound, "A Retrospect," Literary Essays, ed. T. S. Eliot (New York: New Directions, 1935), 3.
8 Ezra Pound [as B. H. Dias], "Art Notes," New Age 26 (January 29, 1920): 205-6.
9 Eliot, "Hamlet," Selected Essays (1932; London: Faber and Faber, 1999), 145.
Io Guillaume Apollinaire, Alcools, Oeuvres Poétiques (Paris: Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1956), 147.
II Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Age of High Capitalism, trans. Harry Zohn (London: Verso, 1997).
I2 Apollinaire, Alcools, Oeuvres Poétiques, 39.
13 Eliot, "Mandarins 3," Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917, ed. Christopher Ricks (London: Faber and Faber, 1996), 2 I.
14 Eliot, "Poetry and Drama," On Poetry and Poets, 88.
15 Eliot to Ford Madox Ford, quoted in The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (London: Faber and Faber, 1971), 129.
16 Eliot, "Rhetoric and Poetic Drama," The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism (London: Methuen, 1932), 84.
17 Maurice Maeterlinck, "The Blind," The Plays of Maurice Maeterlinck, trans. Richard Hovey (Chicago and New York: Herbert S. Stone, 1905), 266-7.
18 As Moody finely describes it, "The 'We,' at once personal and inclusive, is a new voice, a new subject. The earlier parts of the poem call for a reading in different voices - perhaps four or five for the several distinct states of mind and feeling. But here, in a dramatised reading, the lines can no longer be distributed according to those characters or personae. One voice alone will not do either. All the voices are present; but changed out of themselves into an intensified common voice, as individual speaking voices can become one in song or incantation." A. David Moody, Thomas Stearns Eliot: Poet, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 97.

19 See, for instance, the cubo-futurist manifesto "A Slap in the Face of Public Taste," published in pre-war Russia. The quoted lines are from Anna M. Lawton, Russian Futurist Manifestoes, 1912-1928, ed. and trans. Anna M. Lawton and Herbert Eagle (first published by Cornell University Press, 1988, rpt. Washington DC: New Academia Publishing, 2005), 5 I-2.
20 Hugo Ball, "Karawane," in Jean-Jacques Thomas and Steven Winspur, Poeticized Language: the Foundations of Contemporary French Poetry (University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press: 1999), 55.
21 Eliot, "The Lesson of Baudelaire," The Tyro, vol. I (Spring 1921): 4.
22 Jean Epstein, La Poésie d'aujourd'hui: Un nouvel état d'intelligence (Paris: Éditions de la Sirène, 1921). Eliot's response was that "The Epstein book is most interesting; I disagree with some important conclusions, but it is a formidable work to attack, and therefore very tonic. Also, he makes his texts - Aragon, Cendrars, Apollinaire etc., - a more serious affair, to be tackled in earnest." Eliot to Richard Aldington, September 8, 1921, The Letters of T.S. Eliot, Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 580.
23 Eliot to James Joyce, May 21, 1921, in The Letters, Volume 1, 560-1.
24 James Joyce, Letters, vol. 3, ed. Richard Ellmann (New York: Viking 1966), 22.
