# 7 

JEWEL SPEARS BROOKER

## Dialectical Collaboration: Editing The Waste Land

On October 23, 1922, less than two weeks after the publication of The Waste Land in the Criterion, T. S. Eliot mailed all manuscripts related to the poem to John Quinn, his benefactor and de facto lawyer in New York. The packet contained fifty-four leaves, divided into two sections. The first consisted of forty leaves of the main text and the second of fourteen leaves of related fragments and drafts. ${ }^{1}$ Quinn accepted the gift "as a mark of friendship," adding that he would like to purchase "the MS. of the Early Poems" (Facsimile xxiv). At his death in 1924, Quinn's papers passed first to his sister Julia (Mrs. William Anderson), and at her death in 1934 to her daughter Mary (Mrs. Thomas Conroy), who put them in storage without looking at them. In the early 1950s, Mrs. Conroy discovered the Eliot manuscripts, and in 1958, she sold them to the New York Public Library. Neither Eliot nor Pound was informed (Facsimile xxix). Asked about the manuscripts in an interview shortly before he died, Eliot said: "We don't know, nobody knows, what became of them. Or who was responsible for their disappearance." ${ }^{2}$ Three years after his death, the New York Public Library contacted Mrs. Eliot and gave her a copy of the manuscripts. She notified Ezra Pound, who assisted her in deciphering his comments, and in 1971, she published a scrupulously edited facsimile with a brief preface by Pound and an introduction that chronicles the preservation and recovery of the manuscripts.

As suggested by the grouping of the manuscripts that he sent to Quinn, Eliot wanted the materials to be considered in two different ways. On the one hand, he wanted to preserve the annotated main text as a tribute to Pound; on the other, he wanted the rejected parts to remain unpublished. He expressed both sentiments in a letter thanking Quinn for his assistance in securing the Dial award for The Waste Land.

My only regret $\ldots$ is that this award should come to me before it has been given to Pound.... In the manuscript of The Waste Land which I am sending

you, you will see the evidences of his work, and I think that this manuscript is worth preserving in its present form solely for the reason that it is the only evidence of the difference which his criticism has made.... I hope that the portions which I have suppressed will never appear in print and in sending them to you I am sending the only copies of these parts. ${ }^{3}$

This is the first of several expressions of appreciation for Pound's role in the final editing of The Waste Land. The recovered manuscripts corroborate Eliot's account of Pound's helpfulness; they also reveal that his first wife Vivien was involved in the genesis and shaping of the text.

The fact that Eliot welcomed the contributions of his wife and a fellow poet was not simply a case of friends helping friends. He and other modernists embraced collaboration as a positive principle, in part as a reaction against the celebration of the solitary genius in Romanticism. Eliot's interest in collaboration, explored in depth by Richard Badenhausen, ${ }^{4}$ is consistent with his understanding of tradition as working with others - "No poet, no artist of any art, has his complete meaning alone" ${ }^{5}$ - and with his appreciation of genres such as drama and epic that include multiple voices. Both poets insisted on the need for artists to work with other artists and on the special status of fellow poets as readers and critics. Pound, moreover, granted collaborator status to patrons, writing to Quinn that "if a patron buys from an artist who needs money ... the patron then makes himself equal to the artist." ${ }^{6}$ Eliot, on the other hand, argues that the essential "other" in the creation of a work of art, was the audience, a position expressed in his essays on drama, the music hall, and ritual. "The working man who went to the music-hall and saw Marie Lloyd and joined in the chorus was himself performing part of the act; he was engaged in that collaboration of the audience with the artist which is necessary in all art." ${ }^{7}$

The Waste Land manuscripts and Eliot's contemporaneous correspondence make it possible to trace the work of the three parties - Eliot, his wife Vivien, and Pound - who were involved in shaping the final text. In a ditty sent to Eliot as the process was nearing completion, Pound describes his role in maieutic terms as that of the "sage homme" (wise man; pun on "sage femme," midwife) who "performed the caesarean Operation." ${ }^{8}$ Pound saw Eliot's poem in progress for the first time on November 21, 1921 when, en route to Lausanne for medical treatment, Eliot passed through Paris, where the Pounds were then living; Pound saw the remaining materials in early January 1922 when Eliot stopped by on his way home. In an exchange of letters in late January, Eliot posed some follow-up queries, and Pound offered his final suggestions. Vivien Eliot, essential in the poem's gestation, was involved much earlier, first as muse and in 1921 as reader and sounding

board. In May 1921, when she was away from London, she and Eliot mailed a draft of part II back and forth. In October, they were together in Margate, and after she left, he wrote to Sidney Schiff that he had composed lines for part III, but wanted to run them by Vivien before showing them to others. ${ }^{9}$

# I. Life and Art in The Waste Land 

The Waste Land as published is a result of negotiations between life and art as embodied in the tension between Vivien and Pound, with Eliot himself completing the dialectical movement. Vivien served as the advocate for life and Pound for art; Eliot clearly recognized the importance of both, valuing the authenticity emanating from Vivien and esteeming the authority issuing from Pound. Eliot underlined the distinction between life and art (the "what" and the "how") in his 1923 review of Ulysses. The central question about Joyce, he maintains, is: "how much living material does he deal with, and how does he deal with it ... as an artist?" ${ }^{10}$ Indeed, in "Four Elizabethan Dramatists," published in 1924, Eliot argues that "actual life is always the material" of art. ${ }^{11}$

Eliot had an abundance of unmediated "living material." In January 1916, over a year into the war and six months into his marriage, he wrote to Conrad Aiken: "I have lived through material for a score of long poems, in the last six months." ${ }^{12}$ His "lived" material included the death of his friend Jean Verdenal, his wife's adultery, their illnesses, her nervous breakdown followed by his own, financial burdens, overwork, uneasy relations with his parents, and war, "the one great tragedy" dwarfing all individual troubles. ${ }^{13}$ Eliot emphasizes this "living material" in retrospective comments on The Waste Land, telling Theodore Spencer that "To me it was only the relief of a personal and wholly insignificant grouse against life; it is just a piece of rhythmical grumbling" (Facsimile I). In a conversation with Donald Hall about the origin of the poem, he remarked, "One wants to get something off one's chest. One doesn't know quite what it is ... until one's got it off." ${ }^{14}$

Eliot's simultaneous commitment to the personal and the impersonal, to lived material (including, ironically, the "grouse against life") and to art put him in a catch-22: the situation that was so rich in material was physically and psychologically debilitating, making it almost impossible for him to master it as an artist. Most of the main text of the poem was written in 1921 - the first two parts between January and May, and the last three between October and the end of the year. ${ }^{15}$ There was a hiatus over the summer, because of a ten-week visit by his mother, brother, and sister. The visit, which involved burdensome living arrangements, was exhausting, and soon after his family left, he collapsed. Vivien, who had suffered a breakdown

in the spring, grumbled to Scofield Thayer: "I have not nearly finished my own nervous breakdown yet." ${ }^{16}$ Eliot was granted a three-month medical leave from the bank and decided to consult Dr. Roger Vittoz in Lausanne. But first, on October 15, he and Vivien began his recuperation by going to Margate - she for two weeks and he for three. While there, he composed chunks of part III. On November 12, he returned to London, and on the 18th he and Vivien left for Paris, where they were to visit the Pounds and where she was to linger while he went to Lausanne. On the 2 Ist, Eliot met with Pound and showed him some of The Waste Land manuscripts. This is the moment when Eliot, who had been drowning in "living material," refocused on craftsmanship. With Pound's suggestions in hand, he continued on to Switzerland where he revised what he had written and completed drafts of parts IV and V, the latter needing almost no revision.

Eliot discerned the value of Pound's detachment and expertise, so much so that he proposed publishing lines from Pound's "Sage Homme" along with The Waste Land: "Wish to use caesarian operation in italics in front." ${ }^{17}$ Pound wisely advised against printing his doggerel, so Eliot decided to acknowledge his gratitude in another way. In the Boni and Liveright edition that he presented to Pound in 1923, he inscribed: "For Ezra Pound / il miglior fabbro." This dedication, "the better maker," is Dante's tribute in Purgatorio XXVI to his poetic predecessor Arnaut Daniel. When assembling his work for Collected Poems 1909-1925, Eliot added the dedication to the title page of The Waste Land, a position it has enjoyed in all subsequent printings. In 1938, at a time when it was fashionable to disparage Pound, Eliot found an occasion to praise him by explaining the dedication. In an essay in Purpose, G. W. Stonier had speculated that Eliot's dedication had contributed to an undeserved elevation of Pound's reputation; ${ }^{18}$ in the following issue, Eliot responded, explaining that in using the phrase from Dante, he wished "to honour the technical mastery and critical ability manifest in [Pound's] own work, which had also done so much to turn The Waste Land from a jumble of good and bad passages into a poem." ${ }^{19}$

# II. The Muse versus the Critic 

The Waste Land had its debut on June 4, 1922 at a dinner party at the home of Virginia and Leonard Woolf. As recorded in Virginia's Diary, Eliot "sang it \& chanted it rhythmed it. It has great beauty \& force of phrase: symmetry; \&tensity.... The Waste Land, it is called; \& Mary Hutch[inson], who has heard it more quietly, interprets it to be Tom's autobiography" [sic]. ${ }^{20}$ Woolf's attention to art and Hutchinson's to life highlight two essential elements in the poem. At an earlier stage in the

poem's existence, the tension can be seen in the editorial interventions of Vivien, representing "Tom's autobiography," and Pound, representing "beauty \& ... symmetry." Vivien's mantra is emphasized in a letter to Eliot's brother at the conclusion of the family's summer visit in England. On August 23, 1921, she wrote begging forgiveness for behaving "just like a wild animal when [we] saw you off." She explained that "the emotionless condition" maintained during their visit had been such "a great strain" that she had been tempted to "burst out and scream and dance." After pouring out her feelings, she concluded "Good-bye Henry. And be personal, you must be personal, or else it's no good. Nothing's any good" (Letters I, 577).

Vivien's italicized "be personal," reflected in her response to Eliot's drafts, was countered by Pound's frequent reminders to be impersonal. He recommended removing confessional elements, self-portraiture, personal pronouns, and other autobiographical markers. The contrast between Vivien's advice and Pound's is most evident in the typescript of "A Game of Chess." In May 1921, at a time when she was away from London, Eliot mailed her a draft. She scribbled her impressions, returning it with a note on the back of one of the sheets: "Make any of these alterations - or none if you prefer. Send me back this copy" (Facsimile 15). Her suggestions, significantly, were made some nine months before Pound saw Eliot's drafts.

Vivien was especially enthusiastic about the faux dialogue between the woman at her dressing table and her husband which begins, "'My nerves are bad tonight. Yes, bad. Stay with me'" (Facsimile 11, line 35). This section appears to be a transcript of a bedroom conversation between the Eliots. In the margin, Vivien wrote "W O N D E R F U L." When Pound saw the typescript, he wrote "photography" beside the very same lines. She had also written "wonderful" and "\& wonderful" and "Yes" beside subsequent lines, including "Are you alive or not? Is there nothing in your head?" Pound countered, writing "photo" beside these mimetic lines. This instance of Eliot's accommodation of the antithesis between life and art illustrates the dialectical structure evident in the poem's composition.

As he had in the boudoir scene, Eliot in the pub scene honors Vivien's collaboration by accepting her suggestions. She considered "No, m'am, you needn't look old-fashioned at me" to be stilted, and recommended "If you don't like it you can get on with it." For "You want to keep him at home, I suppose," she substituted "What you get married for if you don't want to have children" (Facsimile 15). She added color by replacing "medicine" with "pills" in "It's that medicine I took, in order to bring it off" (Facsimile 13). Here, in the pub scene, Pound did not resist her realism, for unlike the dialogue in the boudoir scene, the gossipy chitchat does not echo the

conversation of the Eliots themselves. As can be seen from her substitution of "Goo night" for "Good night" and her appreciation for the closing lines ("Splendid last lines"), her ear for pub talk, as her husband recognized, had a ring of authenticity (Facsimile 15).

Another window into the poles represented by Pound and Vivien can be seen in the revision of "The Fire Sermon," which originally opened with 72 lines in imitation of Alexander Pope's "The Rape of the Lock." In 1928, in an introduction for Pound's Selected Poems, Eliot referred to Pound's response to these lines. "Pound once induced me to destroy what I thought an excellent set of couplets; for, said he, 'Pope has done this so well that you cannot do it better; ... you cannot parody Pope unless you can write better verse than Pope - and you can't." ${ }^{21}$ Most of "The Fire Sermon" was written in Margate after Vivien had returned to London. In his November 4 letter to Schiff, Eliot said, "I have done a rough draft of part of part III, but do not know whether it will do, and must wait for Vivien's opinion as to whether it is printable" (Letters I, 60I). Vivien must have considered the parody "printable," for under the pseudonym "F. M." (Fanny Marlow), she incorporated twenty lines (revised, improved) into "Letters of the Moment," one of her several contributions to the Criterion, and another indication of her collaborative efforts with Eliot. ${ }^{22}$ Not only did he supply the couplets, but he also inserted two brief paragraphs, the second ending with an allusion to "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock." "On my replying ... that I found Gilbert and Sullivan a bore, the same expression convulsed his features as ... if one had said, 'settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl;' No, I did not care for the Boutique at all, not at all" (36I-2).

Pound disapproved of including echoes from the "Prufrock" period in The Waste Land. Especially noteworthy is his attempt to restrain Eliot's characteristic ambivalence, a trait that had hardened during his philosophical training. Impatient with intellectual waffling, Pound blue-penciled several examples in "The Fire Sermon." In the episode of the typist and clerk, beside the line "Perhaps his inclinations touch the stage," he circled the offending word and scribbled "Perhaps be damned" (Facsimile 45). Similarly, beside "And perhaps a weekend at the Metropole," he underlined "perhaps" twice and added "dam per'apsez" (Facsimile 31). Of Eliot's line about the typist "Across her brain one half-formed thought may pass," Pound circled and deleted "may" and chided, "make up / yr. mind / you Tiresias / if you know / know damn well / or / else you / dont" [sic] (Facsimile 47). Pound also frowned on including reminders of the autobiographically tinged characters and mise-en-scène of Eliot's early poems. In the Harvard poems, Eliot had masked his subjectivity by the use of drama and internal debate. But Pound had grown tired of this portrait of the artist as a young man. No more tea parties and erotically charged visits to older women. No more prudish,

passive, thought-tormented, self-conscious intellectuals. No more Prufrocks, no more Hamlets, no more ambivalent and repressed gentleman callers.

A striking example of this sort of intervention can be seen in "The Death of the Duchess," a portion of The Waste Land manuscript with strong echoes of "Prufrock," "Portrait of a Lady," and "The Boston Evening Transcript." The characters are automatons in "silk hats," who

On Sunday afternoon go out to tea
On Saturday have tennis on the lawn, and tea
On Monday to the city, and then tea.
They know what they are to feel and what to think,
They know it with the morning printer's ink....
But what is there for you and me
For me and you
What is there for us to do?
(Facsimile 105, lines 2-I2)
Pound recognized this speaker as the cousin of the self-possessed self-conscious young man in "Portrait of a Lady" who sips tea and observes himself in the mirror, "Not knowing what to feel or if I understand" (I I9). ${ }^{23}$ In the muted music of these lines, he noticed the "cadence / reproduction / from $\operatorname{Pr}[u f r o c k]$ / or Port[trait / of a Lady]." In "Time to regain the door," he heard echoes of the Prufrockian "Time to turn back and descend the stair" (Facsimile 107). Then, in addition to resisting the music of 1909-11, Pound redlined confessional elements and first-person pronouns. In "The Fire Sermon," for example, Eliot initially wrote "Unreal City, I have seen and see / Under the brown fog of your winter noon" (Facsimile 3 I, lines 93-4). Pound brackets or circles "I have seen and see" and "your." Near the line "London, your people is bound upon the wheel!" he writes "vocative??" (Facsimile 43). In revisions such as these, Pound tempers Eliot's "personal grumbling," adjusting the balance between life and art and improving the tone of the final text.

# III. Under the Knife: Pound's "Caesarean Operation" 

In acknowledging Pound's improvement of The Waste Land, Eliot repeatedly refers to the importance of his excisions. "It was in 1922 that I placed before [Pound] in Paris the manuscript of a sprawling, chaotic poem called The Waste Land which left his hands, reduced to about half its size." ${ }^{24}$ In his last interview, Eliot once again emphasizes the importance of Pound's cuts, recalling that he had expunged a great deal of "dead matter." ${ }^{25}$ In this, the most important of his maieutic services, Pound had two kinds of recommendations - the first suggesting that entire sections be removed from the main text; the second recommending that "superfluities" (more or less independent fragments and poems) not be added to the main text.

Of the three major blocks excised from the manuscripts, two were suggested by Pound and accepted by Eliot, and one was initiated by Eliot and approved by Pound. Pound advised cutting 154 lines: 72 imitating Pope's "The Rape of the Lock" from "The Fire Sermon," and 82 inspired by Dante's Ulysses canto in the Inferno from "Death by Water." Eliot himself dropped the fifty-four lines that originally stood at the beginning of "The Burial of the Dead." Influenced by Joyce's Ulysses, the omitted section is an American variation of the "Circe" episode, which Eliot was reading in April and May 1921, and of which he wrote to Joyce: "I have nothing but admiration; in fact, I wish, for my own sake, that I had not read it." ${ }^{26}$ The fifty-four deleted lines describe a night on the town in which the protagonists get drunk, go to a show, visit a brothel, and avoid arrest through the intervention of a policeman who joins the group. On the typescript that Pound would have seen in November and again in January, these lines preceded "April is the cruellest month" (I). Although he left no marks on this section of the manuscript, Pound did approve of dropping the Joycean prelude, for on January 24, 1922, he wrote to Eliot "The thing now runs from April ... to shantih without break" (Letters I, 626).

The first of Pound's block cuts, the imitation of Pope, originally stood at the beginning of "The Fire Sermon." Before recommending removing the entire section, Pound attempted to improve it, scribbling such notes as - "Too / loose;" "rhyme drags it / out to / diffuseness" (Facsimile 39). Pound perceived that the satire was both less amusing and less serious than Pope's. The other deletion he recommended - the shipwreck section loosely based on Dante's Ulysses canto - also strengthened the poem. It originally stood at the beginning of "Death by Water" and, at eighty-two lines, was the longest of the block cuts. Eliot composed this section while he was in Lausanne and showed it to Pound in Paris in January. These lines, like those describing the night out in Boston, are associated with America, specifically with Eliot's summers on Cape Ann by the north Atlantic.
"Kingfisher weather, with a light fair breeze, Full canvas, and the eight sails drawing well. We beat around the cape and laid our course From the Dry Salvages to the eastern banks.
(Facsimile 55, lines 13-16)
Pound first attempted to trim the section, condensing the above four lines to:
with a light fair breeze, We beat around the cape From the Dry Salvages.
(Facsimile 63, lines 13-15)

After some line-by-line tinkering, Pound advised expunging the entire narrative. At the same time, he recommended retaining the ten elegiac lines that now constitute the whole of "Death by Water." Evidently Eliot was not enthusiastic about discarding the sea voyage, for after returning to London, he sent Pound a question: "Perhaps better omit Phlebas also???" ${ }^{27}$ Pound responded forcefully:

I DO advise keeping Phlebas.... Phlebas is an integral part of the poem; the card pack introduces him, the drowned phoen. sailor, and he is needed ABSoloootly where he is [sic]. ${ }^{28}$

The suggestion that the death of Phlebas fulfils the prophecy of Madame Sostrosis - "Fear death by water" (55) - suggests that Pound viewed the poem as unified by an unfolding narrative.

In addition to the main text, The Waste Land manuscripts include an assortment of poems and fragments written over a six- or seven-year period. Several brief pieces ("After the turning;" "So through the evening;" and "I am the Resurrection"), as both Lyndall Gordon and Lawrence Rainey have shown, were composed during Eliot's student days. Two poems - "The Death of St. Narcissus" and "The Death of the Duchess" - date from 1915 or 1916; most of the remaining drafts were composed in November and December 1921 as the poem was assuming its final shape. The Harvard fragments and the two independent poems, in an earlier style and confessional mood, were not included in the final poem, but several of the vignettes from 1921, especially those related to the City of London, were retained and integrated.

Eliot seems to have considered publishing three of the shorter pieces from 1921 - "Song" (fifteen lines), "Exequy" (thirty lines), and "Dirge" (eighteen lines) - with the final text of The Waste Land. Pound advised excluding these "remaining superfluities:" "I think you had better leave 'em, abolish 'em altogether.... One test is whether anything wd. be lacking if the last three were omitted. I don't think it wd." ${ }^{29}$ Pound admired two lines in the "Song" - "When the surface of the blackened river / Is a face that sweats with tears?" (Facsimile 99, lines 10-11): "The song has only two lines which you can use in the body of the poem." ${ }^{30}$ Eliot asked, "Would you advise working sweats with tears etc. into nerves monologue; only place where it can go?," ${ }^{31}$ to which Pound replied, "I dare say the sweats with tears will wait." ${ }^{32}$ Eliot's momentary inclination to place the two lines in the boudoir scene of "A Game of Chess" suggests that they belong to the cluster of "living material" associated with Vivien. A few years later, in 1924, these lines were to appear, slightly varied, in drafts for "The Hollow Men," especially in the intensely personal poems, "Eyes that last I saw in tears" and "The wind sprang up at four o'clock."

Pound's "technical mastery" is not only evident in the cuts he recommended but also in his suggestions regarding style. In "The Fire Sermon," for example, part of Eliot's draft began:

The typist home at teatime, who begins
To clear her broken breakfast away her broken breakfast, lights
Her stove, and lays out squalid food in tins,
Prepares the room toast and sets the room to rights.
Out of the window perilously spread
Her drying combinations meet the sun's last rays,
And on the divan piled, (at night her bed),
Are stockings, dirty camisoles, and stays.
(Facsimile 33, lines 129-36)
Pound condensed the first three lines to: "The typist home at teatime, who/ clears away her broken breakfast, lights / Her stove, and lays out squalid food" (Facsimile 45, lines 129-31). Beside the second quatrain, he inscribed "inversions / not warranted / by any real / exigence of / metre" and changed "on the divan piled" to "piled on the divan" (Facsimile 45, line 135). Pound disliked linguistic clutter, and throughout the manuscript, cut modifiers, participial phrases, and entire lines. He objected, furthermore, to syntactical inversions, consistently nudging Eliot toward a leaner sentence structure.

Pound also improved the tone of The Waste Land, especially in "The Fire Sermon." In addition to redlining the misogynistic description of Fresca's morning toilet, he marked several phrases belittling the typist and the clerk. In the draft, Tiresias "Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest, / Knowing the manner of these crawling bugs" (Facsimile 45, lines 142-3). Pound wisely wrote "Too / easy" in the margin. He struck out two quatrains on the clerk's tawdry boldness, and most important, he sanitized the passage in which the clerk, having coupled with the typist, takes his leave:

And at the corner where the stable is,
Delays only to urinate, and spit.
(Facsimile 47, lines 179-80)
Pound scratched these lines, writing "probaly over the mark" (Facsimile 47). As his comment suggests, they are gratuitous and uncalled for by the vignette. In their crudeness, moreover, they tend to displace disgust from the clerk to the poet who is observing him.

Finally, Pound enhanced the quality of the verse in The Waste Land. He had a good auditory sense and pointed out numerous passages where the meter and rhyme needed attention. Beside the opening lines featuring the typist and clerk, quoted above, he wrote "verse not interesting / enough as verse / to warrant / so / much/ of it" (Facsimile 45). In "A Game of Chess,"

he marked the first three lines as "Too tum-pum / at a stretch" (Facsimile II). Elsewhere, he chided, as I point out above, "rhyme drags it / out to / diffuseness" (Facsimile 39). Pound also sharpened Eliot's images, not only by eliminating modifiers, but by calling attention to the use of the pathetic fallacy, as in the "sullen river" (Facsimile 99).

# IV. Eliot and Pound: Elucidation versus Weightiness 

Pound's assistance in editing The Waste Land was invaluable, a fact acknowledged by Eliot and documented by the reappearance of the manuscripts. In spite of the congruence of some of their ideas about modern poetry, however, their attitudes toward the relationship between life and art were not the same. Eliot's focus was inductive, moving from life to art, from "living material" to form, from the "what" to the "how," from the existential to the theoretical. Pound's focus, on the other hand, was deductive, moving from art to life, from poetics to content, from the "how" to the "what," from movements and "isms" to poets and poems. Eliot projected the collapsing mind of Europe by focusing on his own mental breakdown, and Vivien's, whereas Pound thought of the modernist movement as Renaissance II. This contrast in focus - also a contrast in temperament - was useful in that it facilitated a process in which Eliot internalized polarities and then, in a dialectical loop, transcended them in the making of the poem.

The most revealing instance of the tension between Eliot's empiricism and Pound's aestheticism can be seen in their exchange regarding the epigraph. After Eliot conferred with Pound in Paris in January 1922, he returned to London and, based in part on their conversation, made a few more revisions. On or around January 20, he mailed Pound a packet to which he had added a new page containing the title and an epigraph from Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness.
"Did he live his life again in every detail of desire, temptation, and surrender during that supreme moment of complete knowledge? He cried in a whisper at some image, at some vision, - he cried out twice, a cry that was no more than a breath

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \text { - 'The horror! the horror!'" } \\
& \text { (Facsimile 2) }
\end{aligned}
$$

On January 24 Pound wrote: "I doubt if Conrad is weighty enough to stand the citation." ${ }^{33}$ Eliot replied on the 26th: "Do you mean not use Conrad quot. or simply not put Conrad's name to it? It is much the most appropriate I can find, and somewhat elucidative." ${ }^{34}$ On the 28th, Pound responded: "Do as you like about.... Conrad; who am I to grudge him his laurel crown" (Letters I, 630).

In this exchange, Eliot uses adjectives - "appropriate ... elucidative" that point to content, to the living material of The Waste Land. He clearly felt that the great moral and political enigmas caught in Heart of Darkness were relevant to his poem, and that Marlow's memory of the whispered words of the dying Mr. Kurtz - "The horror! the horror!" - resonated with The Waste Land not in part but in whole, as epigraphs are designed to do. Kurtz is not simply an embodiment of evil or imperialism; as a poet, an artist, an orator, a philanthropist, an intellectual seeking forbidden knowledge, he is an objectification of the European mind in the process of breaking up. As Marlow notes, "All Europe contributed to the making of Kurtz." ${ }^{35}$ The choice of this epigraph illustrates one of Eliot's strengths: in attending to his own "living material," he illuminates the living material of his moment in history (the mind of Europe collapsing in and after the Great War). Eliot's admiration of Conrad was not new. In 1911, in Paris, he had recommended Conrad's Youth and Typhoon to his French tutor, Alain-Fournier. ${ }^{36}$ His fascination with Conrad is substantiated by the epigraph to "The Hollow Men" - "Mistah Kurtz - he dead." - a poem in which Kurtz, like Brutus and Guy Fawkes, constitutes a link between idealism and apocalypse.

Pound, in stark contrast, ignored the content of the epigraph (and of Heart of Darkness), focusing instead on the author and whether or not he was "weighty enough" to be used in the epigraph. Eliot was nonplused and asked if Pound meant to suggest that he should omit "Conrad's name." Pound's retort that quoting Heart of Darkness would constitute a "laurel crown" for Conrad is astonishing. Eliot, after all, was in 1921 only an aspiring young American poet, whereas Conrad was the most distinguished living writer of his generation, with the possible exception of Thomas Hardy. Eliot brooded over Pound's disparaging remarks, and on March 12, without further comment, he notified Pound that he had "substituted for the J. Conrad" the passage from the Satiricon by Petronius, ${ }^{37}$ in which Trimalchio recalls (in Latin) an incident in which the Sibyl tells him (in Greek) that she wants to die. As part of the Frazerian monomyth that Eliot drew on for structure and themes, the Sibyl, a figure of caged and desiccated divinity, is relevant to such motifs as the marginalization of God in the post-Nietzschean world. But as Eliot himself recognized, this epigraph generates a different poem, and as he confessed to his wife, he regretted making this concession to Pound (Letters I, 630, note 4).

Eliot and Pound remained friends after 1922, but their collaboration, which ran from 1917 to 1922, was at an end. As Eliot explained, there came a point "at which difference of outlook and belief became too wide; or it may have been distance ... or both" (Poetry 335). Their collaboration in The Waste Land worked because it balanced "technical mastery" and

"living material." The attenuation of their relationship was marked by a shift in terms in which life as lived was replaced by ideology. In Pound's case, the shift was toward economics and politics; in Eliot's, toward religion. In 1928, in a piece for The Dial called "Isolated Superiority," Eliot notes the paradox that "Pound has great influence but no disciples ... [for] influence can be exerted through form, whereas one makes disciples only among those who sympathize with the content." ${ }^{38}$ Although Eliot clearly had qualms about Pound's emerging content, he admired him as a poet and critic and, in the 1946 essay in Poetry, defended him in the dark days following Pound's arrest for treason at the end of World War II. The collaboration with Vivien also dwindled to nothing in the mid-1920s, as their marriage darkened, their health worsened, and Eliot moved alone toward the baptismal font at Finstock Church. Henceforth, his collaborators would be primarily friends in the church, Emily Hale, and associates in the theater. ${ }^{39}$

# NOTES 

I In preparing his article on the "lost" manuscripts, Donald Gallup moved the drafts of two fragments from the miscellaneous to the main text section, changing the balance to forty-two and twelve. See Donald Gallup, "The 'Lost' Manuscripts of T. S. Eliot," The Times Literary Supplement 3480 (November 7, 1968): 1238-40, and T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), xxx.
2 Eliot, "A Conversation with T. S. Eliot." Interview with Leslie Paul. Kenyon Review (Winter 1964-5): 2I [II-2I].
3 Eliot to John Quinn, September 21, 1922, The Letters of T. S. Eliot: Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 748.
4 See Richard Badenhausen, T. S. Eliot and the Art of Collaboration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
5 Eliot, "Tradition and the Individual Talent" (1919), The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition: The Perfect Critic, 1919-1926, 107 [105-14], ed. Anthony Cuda and Ronald Schuchard (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014. Project MUSE. https://muse.jhu.edu/).
6 Ezra Pound, Selected Letters: 1907-1941, ed. D. D. Paige (New York: New Directions, 1950), 53.
7 Eliot, "In Memoriam: Marie Lloyd" (1923), in The Perfect Critic, 420 [418-23].
8 Pound to Eliot, January 24, 1922, Letters I, 626.
9 Eliot to Sydney Schiff, November 4?, 1921, Letters I, 601.
Io Eliot, "Ulysses, Order, and Myth" (1923), in The Perfect Critic, 478 [476-81].
II Eliot, "Four Elizabethan Dramatists" (1923), in The Perfect Critic, 505 [503-12].
12 Eliot to Conrad Aiken, January 10, 1916, Letters I, 138.
13 Eliot to his Father, December 23, 1917, Letters I, 242.

I4 Eliot, "The Art of Poetry, I: T. S. Eliot." Interview with Donald Hall. Paris Review (Spring/Summer 1959): [47-70].
15 The chronology used in this essay is essentially that of Lyndall Gordon in The Imperfect Life of T. S. Eliot, rev. ed. (1998; London: Virago, 2012), and Lawrence Rainey in Revisiting The Waste Land (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005).
I6 Cited in Gordon, The Imperfect Life, 168.
17 Eliot to Pound, January 26?, 1922, Letters I, 629.
I8 Stonier, G. W., "The Mystery of Ezra Pound," Purpose io no. I (Jan/Mar 1938): 2I-6.
19 Eliot, "On a Recent Piece of Criticism," Purpose 10 no. 2 (April/June): 93, $[90-4]$.
20 Virginia Woolf, The Diary of Virginia Woolf: Volume Two, 1920-1924, ed. Anne Olivier Bell (New York: Harcourt, 1978), 178.
2 I Eliot, "Introduction" to Selected Poems, by Ezra Pound (London: Faber, 1928), 18, $[7-2 \mathrm{I}]$.
22 Eliot, Vivien [F. M./Fanny Marlow], "Letters of the Moment," Criterion 2 no. 7 (April 1924): 360-4.
23 Eliot, "Portrait of a Lady," The Complete Poems and Plays 1909-1950 (1952; New York: Harcourt, 1971).
24 Eliot, "Ezra Pound," Poetry Magazine: A Magazine of Verse 68 no. 6 (Sept. 1946): 330, [326-38].

25 Eliot, "A Conversation," 20.
26 Eliot to James Joyce, May 21, 1921, Letters I, 562.
27 Eliot to Pound, January 26?, 1922, Letters I, 629.
28 Pound to Eliot, January 28?, 1922, Letters I, 630.
29 Pound to Eliot, January 24, 1922, Letters I, 625.
30 Ibid.
3 I Eliot to Pound, January 26?, 1922, Letters I, 629.
32 Pound to Eliot, January28?, 1922, Letters I, 630.
33 Pound to Eliot, January 24, 1922, Letters I, 625.
34 Eliot to Pound, January 26?, 1922, Letters I, 629.
35 Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness, 3rd edition, ed. Robert Kimbrough (1899; New York: W. W. Norton, 1988), 50.
36 Alain-Fournier to Eliot, July 25, 191 I, Letters I, 26.
37 Eliot to Pound, March 12, 1922, Letters I, 64I.
38 T. S. Eliot, "Isolated Superiority," A review of Personae., The Dial, 84 no. I (Jan): 4, [4-7].
39 See also Jewel Spears Brooker, "Common Ground and Collaboration in T. S. Eliot," Mastery and Escape: T. S. Eliot and the Dialectic of Modernism (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1994), 65-80, and Ezra Pound, "Introduction," Literary Essays of Ezra Pound, 1935 (New York: New Directions, 1954).
