# 8 

MICHAEL COYLE

## Doing Tradition in Different Voices: Pastiche in The Waste Land

Corresponding in 1919 with novelist Ramon Fernandez, Marcel Proust presented his idea that, far from being passive imitation, the writing of pastiche is "criticism in action." ${ }^{\text {I }}$ Having launched his career earlier that summer with Pastiches et mélanges, this understanding of pastiche was for Proust a matter of some importance. ${ }^{2}$ The writing of pastiche is, Proust affirms:
a matter of hygiene; one must purge oneself of the all-too-natural vice of idolatry and imitation. And in place of underhandedly imitating Michelet or Goncourt by signing (here the names of this or that of our most amiable contemporaries), I did it openly through the form of pastiches, to sink back to being merely Marcel Proust when I write my novels. ${ }^{3}$

This gesture of being "merely" Marcel Proust has its corollary in T. S. Eliot's notion of "tradition:" the individual talent pales in significance to the tradition which potentially renders his or her voice as meaningful. So too does the vision of writing as a form of "hygiene." But although the idea that good writing should be hygienic marks a distinctly and broadly modernist (and particularly Futurist) preoccupation, informing the criticism of figures as diverse as Wyndham Lewis, Ezra Pound, Ernest Hemingway, and - of course - Eliot, Proust's connection of hygiene with the practice of pastiche in particular is something more unusual, more striking. "Pastiche" designates writing that imitates the style of another artist or period. The word comes into English from the Italian "pasticcio" - a "hodge-podge of a pie containing both meat and pasta.... A pastiche uses recognizable ingredients but offers no new substance." ${ }^{5}$ Our purpose in what follows is to understand how this "hodge-podge" can become something meaty. How is it that the imitation of style can, in the hands of modernist writers like Proust or Eliot, produce something at once "substantial" and "new" - a self-consciously modernist style stripped clean of history in the very process of apparently summoning history?

For Proust, pastiche is a kind of therapeutic exercise, a ritual cleansing, a purification achieved not by resisting but by submitting to stylistic influence. Or, to put it another way, Proust experienced the writing of pastiche as a kind of invocation of the muses, a summoning of spirit that enables poetic vision. Proust saw pastiche as being less a destination than a formal communion with tradition. Strikingly, his letter to Fernandez was written within months of the publication of Eliot's "Tradition and the Individual Talent" (1919). In this essay, explaining his notion of "the historical sense," Eliot proposes that "the most individual parts" of an artist's work "may be those in which the dead poets, his ancestors, assert their immortality most vigorously." ${ }^{6}$ But here these two modernists part company. For Proust, such communion represents a point of departure; for Eliot it means a destination. What Proust wants to purge Eliot struggles to embrace.

Somewhat counterintuitively, Proust's position here proves the more conventional in that he regards historical style as something to be worked through in order to prepare the palette for something new. Consider the opening aphorism of Remy de Gourmont's "Tradition and Other Things," which appeared in the Egoist (July 15, 1914), in an authorized translation by imagist poet Richard Aldington: "We must not boast too much of tradition. It is no great merit to place our feet exactly in the tracks which the road indicates; it is a natural tendency. Though it is not very wrong to give way to this tendency, it is better to attempt a new path." ${ }^{7}$ For de Gourmont, pastiche represents a natural but at last a retarding impulse, a kind of artistic indolence. The differences here are not so much cultural - two Frenchmen versus an Anglo-American - as they are historical. The five years (1914-19) that separate Gourmont's essay on "Tradition" from Eliot's, and from Proust's letter, were years of cataclysmic, global war in the aftermath of which the Western World struggled to discover what of its heritage still survived. What strength could the postwar world still draw from historical example? De Gourmont's and Eliot's essays might serve us, then, as milestones, the first marking the terminus of the Victorian era and the second the beginning of our own.

Few early twentieth-century critics, in either Paris or London, would have expected pastiche to be anything more than the kind of exercise apprentice artists undertake to achieve mastery of a tradition. For this reason Eliot's writing of pastiche in The Waste Land from the beginning prompted misunderstanding of what he was about. William Carlos Williams echoed the opinions of many readers when, in the pages of Spring and All (1923), he implicitly attacked Eliot as "the traditionalist of plagiarism." Edmund Wilson initially called The Waste Land a "Rag-Bag of the Soul;" Louis Untermeyer regretted Eliot's "jumble" of "narratives, nursery rhymes, criticism, jazz-rhythms;" John Crowe Ransom found the poem only parodic

and worried that the movement among different languages and styles would cause readers to experience "convulsions." ${ }^{9}$ A century later, however, "postmodern" audiences are now long accustomed to seeing new works put together from features and fragments of older works.

Consider this example from the January 2014 issue of the jazz magazine DownBeat: David Zivan's review of Björkestra's I Go Humble. Björkestra is a jazz orchestra dedicated to reimagining the music of Icelandic singer-songwriter Björk. Midway through the review, Zivan focuses on "Hyperballad," a song from Björk's 1995 album, Post: "Post[] was a lovely pastiche of electronic sounds, laid under a plain, plaintive vocal. Here, the hi-hat renders the same clubby shuffle, but then come lush horn arrangements and warm piano chords. Only the vocal line, by Becca Stevens, is essentially the same." ${ }^{10}$ Notice that Zivan describes Björk's original as a pastiche; he pointedly does not use that term to describe the new work that "covers" it. But he celebrates the Björkestra's reinvention of the original, and does so precisely by affirming that it is a genuinely new work, a work that marks its newness by alluding to (without reproducing exactly) stylistic features of the original (which is itself a pastiche). In other words, this record by Björkestra does not exist in a merely parasitical relation to the original. I note Zivan's review not because he is trying to forge theoretical principle but precisely because he isn't: this kind of short, two-paragraph review works by addressing interests common to both critics and to the broad audience for pop music. For Zivan, as for most twenty-first-century critics, pastiche is simply an ordinary aspect of artistic process. Style emerges in the context of earlier styles; new works are created out of old. What has happened, then, between Proust's moment and our own is what we today know as modernism, and in these events Eliot played a salient role.

This observation of historical change in our relation to the practice is now enshrined in critical tradition. Linda Hutcheon's early work marks a decisive moment in this process, particularly her Theory of Parody (1985) and her Politics of Postmodernism (1989). She regards parody as the distinctive postmodern mode and argues that postmodernism generally "takes the form of self-conscious, self-contradictory, self-undermining statement." ${ }^{11}$ Hutcheon's work powerfully shaped not only the theorizing of the postmodern but also how scholars read modernist texts. Even where other voices drew different conclusions their arguments often bore traces of her strategies. Indeed, this associating of the postmodern with a particular mode (pastiche) is central to Fredric Jameson's Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991), even though Jameson implicitly suggests that Hutcheon identifies the wrong mode. Jameson opens by distinguishing pastiche - which he sees as a postmodern style - from parody - which he

dismisses as modernist. For Jameson, as the Zivan review might suggest, pastiche has by our time become "well-nigh universal" (I6): ${ }^{12}$

Pastiche is, like parody, the imitation of a peculiar or unique, idiosyncratic style, the wearing of a linguistic mask, speech in a dead language. But it is a neutral practice of such mimicry, without any of parody's ulterior motives, amputated of the satiric impulse, devoid of laughter and of any conviction that alongside the abnormal tongue you have momentarily borrowed, some healthy linguistic normality still exists. (17)

In Jameson's account, pastiche means the deployment of a style freed from the historical forces wherein that style once marked the limits of technological possibility. Pastiche means style separated from history. In this way style proves less the expression of an individual author than techniques in a repertoire controlled by the author: style is no longer historically necessary - it is no longer the register of a particular historical moment. Style removed from history becomes something like a taxidermied specimen, removed from life and present in the text only as a sign of the author's mastery: "Faced with these ultimate objects - our social, historical, and existential present, and the past as 'referent' - the incompatibility of a postmodernist 'nostalgia' art language with genuine historicity becomes dramatically apparent. The contradiction propels this mode, however, into complex and interesting new formal inventiveness" (19). Pastiche is thus less an engagement of historical styles than a representation (re-presentation) of them. The subject of pastiche is, in Jameson's view, not then a past age but a validation of the present. Pastiche serves nothing more serious than nostalgia, offering a comforting view wherein historical struggle is made quaint, made safe, displayed precisely to show it no longer is alive.

As theorizers of the postmodern, it is to be expected that Jameson and Hutcheon would want to engage what seems most unsettling and most exciting about the purportedly new era. But I would argue that much of what they are calling "post" is simply the enduring and still unresolved challenges of modernist poetics. Or to put it another way, what Hutcheon and Jameson see as "postmodernist" is largely a function of their way of reading modernism. Both "self-contradictory, self-undermining statements" (Hutcheon I) and pastiche are dynamically present in the single poem most often said to define modernism - Eliot's The Waste Land.

It is hard to see how lines like these from Eliot's "The Fire Sermon" serve to validate the present:

Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song,
Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long.
But at my back in a cold blast I hear
The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear. ${ }^{13}$

The first two lines here play with the music, even more than the meaning, of Edmund Spenser's "Prothalamion" (1596); the second two are a broken, disruptive allusion to Andrew Marvell's "To His Coy Mistress" (168I), where "Time's wingèd chariot hurrying near" (22) becomes "the rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear" (186). The Goldsmith and Marvell passages are both in tetrameters; this passage of Eliot's is irregular, unfolding in lines of five, six, five and seven feet, but uncharacteristically offering rhymed couplets as though nothing were out of the ordinary. Jameson maintains that "the incompatibility of a postmodernist 'nostalgia' art language with genuine historicity ... propels this mode [pastiche] ... into complex and interesting new formal inventiveness" (Jameson 1991, 19). Eliot's form here is certainly inventive, but the question remains what its inventions are for.

The apostrophe to the River Thames, a kind of spectral invocation of the muses, is wrong in tone for parody, but as pastiche Eliot's lines call attention to their modernity in every detail. Let us consider another passage from "The Fire Sermon":

She turns and looks a moment in the glass, Hardly aware of her departed lover; Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass: 'Well now that's done: and I'm glad it's over.' When lovely woman stoops to folly and Paces about her room again, alone, She smoothes her hair with automatic hand, And puts a record on the gramophone. (249-56)

A pastiche of eighteenth-century didactic poetry, these lines allude in particular to Oliver Goldsmith's, The Vicar of Wakefield (1766). In Goldsmith's novel, the famous lines appear as an air that a seduced but repentant daughter sings at her mother's request; the air is inset within prose narration:
"Do, my pretty Olivia," cried she, "let us have that little melancholy air your pappa was so fond of, your sister Sophy has already obliged us. Do child, it will please your old father." She complied in a manner so exquisitely pathetic as moved me.

When lovely woman stoops to folly, And finds too late that men betray, What charm can sooth her melancholy, What art can wash her guilt away?

The only art her guilt to cover, To hide her shame from every eye, To give repentance to her lover, And wring his bosom - is to die.
As she was concluding the last stanza, to which an interruption in her voice from sorrow gave peculiar softness, the appearance of Mr Thornhill's equipage

at a distance alarmed us all, but particularly encreased the uneasiness of my eldest daughter, who, desirous of shunning her betrayer, returned to the house with her sister. ${ }^{14}$

Eliot's famously antinarrative poem nevertheless deploys numerous broken narratives, this allusion to Goldsmith among them. It is in fact a fragment that functions to close the previous narrative fragment, the twice-interrupted account of an assignation between "a small house agent's clerk" (232) and a typist that is, literally and figuratively, the heart of the poem. In Goldsmith, the short air, or song, represents a moment of lyrical reflection; in Eliot, the poetic lines show the typist resisting self-reflection, even as she glances "in the glass": "her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass" (251). Removing Olivia's "air" from Goldsmith's narrative frame, Eliot then transforms all but the first line; the typist, unlike Goldsmith's Olivia, experiences neither melancholy, guilt nor remorse. Instead, she proceeds mechanically onward, smoothing "her hair with automatic hand," and putting "a record on the gramophone" (255-6) - in other words even her music is mechanical and virtually automatic. She is neither abandoned, in Goldsmith's sense, nor given to abandon in the disapproving Victorian sense: simply alone, she is a machine "a human engine" (216) - on autopilot. Eliot's lines neither parody nor imitate Goldsmith's. What happens here is neither satirical nor titillative. This passage is ordinarily recognized as a textual allusion, but it is more importantly pastiche in that Eliot's juxtapositions of historical styles deploys form to suggest the predictability of missing content. In The Waste Land, form is in this way content.

Pastiche in The Waste Land, albeit complex, is not always so heavy in tone. Its function is sometimes light, even comical, and the styles it reproduces can be modern as well as ancient. In "A Game of Chess," as the overwrought wife is on the verge of panic before her silent husband, she demands to know, "'Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?' " (126). The male voice does not answer her, but we hear the "nothing" that is in his own head - a popular song from Ziegfeld's follies of 1912 - "That Shakesperian Rag." The original lyric by Gene Buck and Herman Ruby is clever enough, full of self-satisfied, presentist swagger:

Bill Shakespeare never knew of ragtime in his day, But the high browed rhymes of his syncopated lines, You'll admit, surely fit any song that's now a hit, so this rag I submit. That Shakespearian Rag - most intelligent, very elegant ... ${ }^{15}$

The implication is that Shakespeare was so good he could have made Broadway, even without knowing about ragtime. To hear the song, however, adds some irony to this joke, since David Stamper's music is essentially a

march, a very white, Phillips Sousa-sounding march without the slightest trace of ragtime or, for that matter, of African-American syncopation of any kind. But, as David Chinitz has established, Eliot himself showed sustained interest in jazz, and that interest informs his allusion to this so-called "Rag." ${ }^{16}$ There is, finally, more syncopation in Eliot's opening allusion to this "nothing" than can be heard in the entire original. "But" (127) hangs below the previous line ("'Is there nothing in your head?'") and liminally above Eliot's version of the first line of the chorus; as a line unto itself, it is stressed and followed by the slight pause of a line ending. Then comes his pastiche:

O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag It's so elegant
So intelligent (I28-30)
The repeated "O"s appear to mime the kind of repetition found in jazz (but not ragtime): "riffing," where a repeated note or pattern of notes becomes a motif more rhythmic than melodic. As distinct, single-syllable words, each "O" carries a stress. Consequently, this line opens with a kind of tonal and emotional stasis, more ponderous than jazzy. Five successive single-syllable words, five successive stresses, and then Eliot lets loose with one dazzling flourish. The extra syllable that transforms "Shakespearean" to "Shakespeherian" releases the tension built up by the first part of the line - five almost-static syllables followed by five that come rapidly, fluidly, lightheartedly. There is more jazz in this one word than in the whole of the 1912 "rag." The subsequent lines - "It's so elegant / So intelligent" - in the subsiding pulses of the multisyllabic adjectives, return us to the overwrought tone of the woman's questions. Jazz here makes for the briefest of interludes. The song makes no "difference" to the woman, who never felt its presence, and when next we hear the male voice, the "nothing" in his head has given way to a list of somethings that the couple will perhaps inevitably do to pass the time and keep themselves from feeling too keenly that time is passing.

The formal dynamics of Eliot's line, "O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag" (I28), not only mark it as deftly accomplished pastiche but also suggest why attempts to read it "straight" as either a critique or a celebration of urban modernity so typically run into trouble. That the song in his head is the "nothing" charged to be there by his wife would suggest a negative view of modern culture; but at the same time this line represents the only playful moment in a fairly dreadful scene. The Waste Land does its best work in such passages as this, passages that deliberately generate ambiguity and resist attempts to "solve" its ambiguity. The tension of the

poem requires both readings to be present - requires us to see the song as both "nothing" and as a little something special. Moreover, although the diagetic scene is dreadful, there is such life and invention in Eliot's language as to suggest, however implicitly, reason for hope. Pastiche is the modal key that unlocks this cage. Functioning as neither parody nor allusion, pastiche in The Waste Land summons historical difference and hermeneutic ambiguity without offering grounding for either.

Before the modernist era, pastiche typically functioned either as homage or as instruction. Proust, as we have seen, regarded it not as a goal in itself so much as a formal communion with tradition. But Eliot's poetry is decisively post-Baudelairean in that it typically looks not up to the clouds but down to the street for inspiration. The catalog of insignificant routines in "A Game of Chess" leads to a line break, after which the section resumes in a working-class pub. Formally, this segment is a dramatic monologue, one that out-Brownings Robert Browning in the energetic ugliness of its language: "When Lil's husband got demobbed, I said - / I didn't mince my words, I said to her myself" (139-40). But the speaker's emphatic reiteration of her own speech act, "I said ... I said," suggests a very particular, even demystifying relation to the Victorian conventions of the dramatic monologue. Where Browning or Tennyson represented speech in ways that endeavor to make us forget we are reading a poem, Eliot's speaker insistently reminds us that we reading represented speech. Just as the story of the sexual encounter in "The Fire Sermon" is framed and interrupted by the intrusive voice of Tiresias, the pub scene of "Game of Chess" is framed and interrupted by the publican's call of "HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME," what in the United States is known as last call, with the difference that in the UK patrons must leave the establishment. In effect, the situation tells us that the speaker knows she hasn't but a few moments to relate her heartless tale - she knows but can't resist getting into it. Her language is propelled every bit as relentlessly, desperately perhaps, as the overwrought speech in the upper-class boudoir of the previous scene. For all that this speaker is holding forth in a neighborhood pub where she seems to know the other patrons, calling out her goodnights on leaving, she too seems anxious for connection. Her speech, self-certain and aggressive, marking more absence than presence, is her only form of connection that the poem allows us to see.

Thinking of this scene in terms of pastiche helps foreground Eliot's challenges to nineteenth-century poetic tradition. Pastiche functions here to challenge readers to recognize themselves, offering a mirror to show what he would call in a poem of 1924 "the eyes but not the tears of tradition." ${ }^{17}$ Jameson is right, in other words, to distinguish pastiche from parody, but his

concomitant claim that pastiche is "a neutral practice of such mimicry, without any of parody's ulterior motives" needs qualification (17). What Eliot does here is not "mimicry" per se, but it is certainly critical, and doubtless critical in an "ulterior" fashion. Eliot's praxis extends the play of pastiche, producing interactions between historically alien styles and forms, so that style and form pull against one another, producing a dissonance wherein the elements of the poem seem incomplete, in need of resolution. This doesn't just mean the juxtaposition of different styles but the interaction of style with formal elements that destabilize them.

In no part of The Waste Land is this condition more apparent than in the notes that Eliot appended to the poem after its initial magazine publications. Ordinarily, such apparatus serves to limit semiotic play, to ground interpretation and suggest how the poem is to be read. Eliot's notes certainly do the latter, but they do so by example rather than by precept - by showing rather than by telling. Several times, as in the notes to lines 46, 199, or 360 , he allows that he does not remember the exact source for his allusions, as though the poem were an oral performance and his commentary off-the-cuff. More importantly, the notes more often destabilize than secure readings of the poem. For starters, as Jo Ellen Green Kaiser has observed, although "at least one speaker of the poem knows only 'a heap of broken images,' the author of the notes knows that the poem has a 'purpose' and a 'plan.'" ${ }^{18}$ Consider, then, Eliot's note to line 360: "The following lines were stimulated by the account of one of the Antarctic expeditions (I forget which, but I think one of Shackleton's): it was related that the party of explorers, at the extremity of their strength, had the constant delusion that there was one more member than could actually be counted." But Eliot's lines, which this note purportedly glosses, ordinarily summon not scientific associations but religious ones:

Who is the third who walks always beside you?
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded (359-63)
As Jahan Ramazani's gloss in the Norton Anthology of British Literature puts it, "the experience is associated with Jesus' unrecognized presence on the way to Emmaus." ${ }^{19}$ In other words, the common association here is with the Gospel of Luke 24:13-35:
${ }^{13}$ And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs.

${ }^{14}$ And they talked together of all these things which had happened.
${ }^{15}$ And it came to pass, that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.
${ }^{16}$ But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.
Eliot's note does not so much cancel out this connection as problematize it; theoretically the poetic text is primary, the note supplementary - the poem inspirational and the gloss explanatory. But endnote though it might be, the note doesn't get "the last word" but instead moves perpetually in relation to the poem. The note, in other words, is itself textualized. Neither a parody of hermeneutics nor a hermeneutical parody, we might, in fact, consider it a pastiche of critical discourse written fully forty years before Vladimir Nabokov's Pale Fire.

There is, at last, no part of The Waste Land untouched by pastiche. In fact, "The Burial of the Dead" originally presented a fifty-four-line opening sequence that Eliot later cut, perhaps because it seemed to him too much an imitation of the "Night Town" section of Joyce's Ulysses. His decision was likely informed by Pound's critique of the "Fresca" section that originally opened "The Fire Sermon":

Admonished by the sun's inclining ray, And swift approaches of the thievish day, The white-armed Fresca blinks, and yawns, and gapes, Aroused from dreams of love and pleasant rapes. Electric summons of the busy bell Bring[s] brisk Amanda to destroy the spell ... ${ }^{20}$

Valerie Eliot tells us that "This opening passage was written in imitation of The Rape of the Lock" and refers to it as a "pastiche;" Eliot himself wrote in 1928 that Pound had "induced me to destroy what I thought an excellent set of couplets; for, said he, 'Pope has done this so well that you cannot do it better; and if you mean this as a burlesque, you had better suppress it, for you cannot parody Pope unless you can write better verse than Pope - and you can't." ${ }^{21}$ Interestingly enough, Pound has to ask if the lines are intended as "burlesque," or parody. Uncharacteristically, he wasn't certain.

That Eliot took Pound's advice here suggests that he wasn't certain either, but as Mrs. Eliot notes, even after cutting this section Eliot remained fond enough of the material to republish much of it, pseudonymously, two years later. Removed from the textual dynamics of The Waste Land the lines do resolve into little more than burlesque, but it is possible to see that their original function was something rather different. To be sure, the figure of Fresca exemplifies the kind of mock dignity associated with burlesque in its older sense (vulgarizing lofty material or treating ordinary material with

mock dignity). But in Popean satire there is no friction between form and content because his poetry invites readers to sit with the poet in judgment on human folly. In this deleted material from The Waste Land we are much less sure of ourselves, and Eliot's couplets metapoetically turn on the reader. After a passage imagining how different, how much healthier Fresca might have been in some other time or place - a "lowly weeping Magdalene" or a version of Dante Gabriel Rossetti's "lazy laughing Jenny" (Facsimile, 41, lines 43-5) - comes poetry that uncomfortably and unabashedly offers real wisdom - just as did the poetry of Pope:

For varying forms, one definition's right:
Unreal emotions, and real appetite....
Fresca was baptised in a soapy sea
Of Symonds - Walter Pater - Vernon Lee.
The Scandinavians bemused her wits,
The Russians thrilled her to hysteric fits.
From such chaotic misch-masch potpourri
What are we to expect but poetry? (Facsimile, 4I, lines 52-6I)
At this moment in the poem, Fresca is luxuriating in her bath, and these lines liken her reading of fin-de-siècle aesthetes (Symonds, Pater, Lee) to being baptized in her own bathwater. As an indiscriminate "chaotic misch-masch potpourri," her reading suggests the apparently random juxtapositions of The Waste Land (as well as the original meaning of "pastiche" - a "hodge-podge"). Rather like the hostess of Pound's "Portrait d'une Femme" (1913) and her "sea-hoard of deciduous things" (25), or even like Eliot's own "Portrait of a Lady" (1915) with her "velleities" (15) and "things that other people have desired" (82), Fresca is "a sort of can-can-saloniere." ${ }^{22}$ But how are we to understand that last rhetorical question? Do we comfort ourselves by assuming Eliot means a poetry of "unreal emotions," very different from his own? Assume a kind of irony, since this dismissal of poetry comes in the context of a very ambitious poem? Take the dismissal of poetry seriously and consider its role in the self-interfering dynamics of the poem? Or, of course, some combination of all of the above?

If this material were merely parody, simply satire, readers would not face such calls for their own activity. As pastiche, in the modernist sense we have been developing, Eliot's question about "expect[ing] ... poetry" is unanswerable except in relation to a reading of the entire poem. Meanwhile, the turn to Popean couplets serves no nostalgic purpose, as Jameson suggests occurs with "a postmodernist ... art language;" the author of the "Essay on Man" would not have understood Eliot's misanthropic (not just misogynist) vision, where the deepest sign of our modern spiritual failure is our

relentless self-exaltation ("Bill Shakespeare never knew of ragtime in his day," etc). Neither do these couplets appear as Jameson's "style separated from history:" the Fresca passage closes with the grotesquely transformed quotation from Marvell's "To His Coy Mistress" that, as we've seen, survives in lines $185-6$ of the published poem:

But at my back in a cold blast I hear
The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
In The Waste Land as published, these lines end a verse paragraph; in Eliot's draft they close the business with Fresca. In the draft, the comparative order and dignified music of the Popean pastiche crashes here into the jagged irregularities of the modern: "A rat crept softly through the vegetation / Dragging its slimy belly on the bank" (Facsimile, 4I, lines 73-4). The Marvell material suggests history and time are aggressive forces that have already laid hands upon us. This is no escape from history. It is more than "the random cannibalization of all the styles of the past, the play of random stylistic allusion." ${ }^{23}$ Eliot's allusion is not pastiche but an intense modeling of the ways that tradition might redeem history, or not. The question is whether history has anything to teach us.

Pastiche in The Waste Land is not then slavish imitation any more than it is primarily parody. It represents the very active pursuit of the tradition that Eliot proposes we seek in "Tradition and the Individual Talent." One of Jameson's great strengths is his further development of that Marxist insight into how styles emerge not as the expression of personal voice but rather of history, of what is technically and historically possible. Removed from historical necessity, style becomes merely another "referent" - a signifier that has become a decorative signified. In 1919 Charles Sanders Peirce's or Ferdinand de Saussure's founding works on semiotics were not widely known, and Eliot did not think in these terms. But he had nevertheless a profound understanding of the embeddedness of style in history: "Someone said: 'The dead writers are remote from us because we know so much more than they did.' Precisely, and they are that which we know" ("Tradition," I6). Eliot refers here to writers themselves, but his interest isn't in their biographies: his interest is in their technical and stylistic discoveries. Eliot's pastiches function to engage a cultural and artistic wholeness whose presence is never to be assumed. Anecdotes about individuals, allusions to ideas and quotations of phrases are but the smallest part of this engagement. More important is the horizon of expectations (another theoretical phrase that Eliot never used), the vision of the world physically embodied in poetic style and form. ${ }^{24}$ That and not the sentiments or ideas of quoted lines, or even the music of earlier styles, is

the signified pursued by Eliot's pastiches. It is in that formal embodiment of history that Eliot produces something new and models how "the past should be altered by the present as much as the present is directed by the past" ("Tradition," 15). Not clean, marked by "the broken fingernails of dirty hands" (303), pastiche is one of Eliot's most powerful ways of showing how the past is always already complete and yet always subject to change.

# NOTES 

I Correspondance de Marcel Proust, ed. Philip Kolb, 2 I vols. (Paris: Plon, 1970-93); Tome XVIII, 380.
2 Pastiches et mélanges appeared in June. See http://www.proust-ink.com/proust/ chronology.html
3 Correspondance de Marcel Proust; Tome XVIII, 380. With thanks to Gabrielle McIntire for her translation of this passage which improves so well on what I had offered; quoted with permission.
4 For discussion of the importance of hygiene to Eliot's writing see Amanda Jeremin Harris, "T. S. Eliot's Mental Hygiene," Journal of Modern Literature, 29 no. 4 (2006).
5 C. Bowen, "Pastiche." The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, ed. Roland Greene and Stephen Cushman, 4th edition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012), 1005.
6 T. S. Eliot, Selected Essays (New York: Harcourt, 1964), 4.
7 Remy de Gourmont, "Tradition and Other Things," The Egoist I, no. I4, trans. Richard Aldington (July 15, 1914), 26I. Reproduced at http://archive.org/ stream/TheEgoistVol.1No.I4/Egoist_I_I4_djvu.txt.
8 William Carlos Williams, Spring and All (1923), republished in Imaginations (New York: New Directions, 1970), 94-5.
9 Reviews quoted from Jewel Spears Brooker, ed., T. S. Eliot: The Contemporary Reviews (London: Cambridge University Press, 2004). Wilson's review appears on 77; Untermeyer's on 93; Ransom's on 107.
Io David Zivan, DownBeat (January 2014), 77.
II Linda Hutcheon, The Politics of Postmodernism (New York: Routledge, 1989), I.
12 Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham: Duke University Press, 1991), 16.
13 Eliot, The Waste Land, in The Complete Poems and Plays (London: Faber and Faber, 1969), 183-6. Subsequent references to The Waste Land will be cited parenthetically by line number.
14 Oliver Goldsmith, The Vicar of Wakefield: A Tale. Supposed to Be Written by Himself (London: R. Collins, 1776), chapter 24; quoted from the online Project Gutenberg edition: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/2667/2667-h/2667-h.htm.
15 "That Shakesperian Rag," lyrics by Gene Buck and Herman Ruby, music by Dave Stamper (New York: Joseph W. Stern \& Co, 1912).
16 David Chinitz, T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993); see especially chapter I, "The Jazz Banjorine," 19-52.

17 From "Doris' Dream Songs," published in Chapbook, 39 (Nov. 1924), 36-7; Eliot later broke up this sequence, excerpting this part and including it in Collected Poems: 1909-1962 as "Eyes that last I saw in tears" (New York: Harcourt, 1991), 90.

18 Jo Ellen Green Kaiser, "Disciplining The Waste Land, or How to Lead Critics into Temptation," Twentieth-Century Literature 44 (1998): 87.
19 Jahan Ramazani, The Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry, Vol. 2 (New York: Norton, 2003), 485.
20 Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 39, lines I-6.
21 Quoted by Valerie Eliot, 127, note I of The Waste Land: A Facsimile, taken from Eliot, from his Introduction to Ezra Pound: Selected Poems (London: Faber \& Gwyer, 1928) (rpt. 1949), xxi.
22 Ezra Pound, "Portrait d'une Femme," Pound: Poems \& Translations, ed. Richard Sieburth (New York: Library of America, 2003), 234. The phrase "a sort of can-can-saloniere" appears in line 70 of Eliot's draft of "The Fire Sermon" (The Waste Land: A Facsimile, 4I).
23 Jameson, 18.
24 Hans Robert Jauss develops his idea of "horizons of expectation" in "Literary History as a Challenge to Literary Theory," New Literary History 2 no.I (Autumn, 1970), 7-37; redacted from chapters V-XII of Toward an Aesthetic of Reception (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982).

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107279612.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
