# 9 

RACHEL POTTER

## Gender and Obscenity in The Waste Land

There is no question that the nature of gender difference is a central preoccupation of T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land. After all, Eliot tells us in the "Notes" to the poem that the insight of the "important" and unifying figure of Tiresias - who knows what it is to be a woman and a man - is fundamental to the poem's "substance." "Substance" is a word whose origins lie in the Greek "hypostasis," meaning "standing under," and Eliot does imply structural as well as visionary cohesion here. In a connected but different claim within his notes, Eliot also insists that femaleness produces a significant unity of being in the poem. The women - Marie, Madame Sosostris, the implied Cleopatra, Philomel, Lil and her friend, Mrs. Porter, the typist, Queen Elizabeth, and the various anonymous women - are all "one" woman (Ibid.). The suggestion that these fragments of myth, history and imagination are unified by their gender forms part of Eliot's desire to enforce poetic unity in The Waste Land. But does it tell us anything about his understanding either of gender difference or being?

Readers have long disagreed about how seriously to take Eliot's notes and their claims to poetic synthesis. Critics including I. A. Richards, F. R. Leavis, and James Longenbach accept Eliot's suggestion that Tiresias embodies the poem's unity. ${ }^{2}$ But most readers have seen no such cohesion. Instead, the poem's power has been seen to lie in the energy of its disordered parts, a force that constitutes Eliot's engagement with the irreconcilable historical and political divisions of the time, ${ }^{3}$ making the poem a product of the play of linguistic signifiers and proliferation of desire and meaning in language, ${ }^{4}$ or a philosophical engagement with the irreducible particulars of positivist interpretations of the world. ${ }^{5}$ As Michael North puts it, Tiresias embodies "the failure of reconciliation"; he is the "mere juxtaposition of part and whole that dramatizes the gulf between them" (I00). Or, as Michael Coyle states: "there is no consistent speaker for this poem." ${ }^{6}$ But, most readers have agreed with North's suggestion that "reconciliation" is a horizon of meaning for the poem's disordered parts. As North puts it: "Eliot could

only approach peace through conflict, as if he could only grasp linguistic unity as an implication of linguistic disorder, and, finally, as if he could imagine social solidarity only by extension of social chaos. Disorder thus becomes not a fault to be overcome, but a necessary moment in the process of arriving at order" (IO4). The terms of the opposition between disorder and order, and the means with which such oppositions might be bridged - something that North helpfully describes as an incomplete movement toward or a grasping - troubled Eliot as a writer and was a central preoccupation of the philosophers he admired including Henry Adams, Irving Babbitt, and George Santayana.

This relation between disorder and implied unity is also significant when we consider the more specific question of Eliot's writing of sexuality and gender difference in The Waste Land. A scattered number of readers have emphasized women's reconciling roles in the poem. ${ }^{7}$ Most critics, however, have argued that Eliot's women enforce - or, actually are the key sites for the poem's depiction of political, linguistic, and subjective disorder. Women have been seen as sites of unmanageable physicality ${ }^{8}$ or as the cause and expression of historical forces Eliot found threatening, which included mass culture, low culture, and mass democracy. 9

Other readings have seen Eliot's constructions of women less as a product of history and politics, and more as something that played out at the level of Eliot's own subjectivity. Tony Pinkney, in a psychoanalytic reading of the poem, sees misogyny and murderous violence in Eliot's depictions of women. Quoting from Eliot's "Sweeney Agonistes" he states that "any Eliotic text has to, needs to, wants to, in one way or another, do a girl in; and if it fails to achieve that goal, it is itself murderously threatened by the girl." ${ }^{10}$ Pinkney's claim that Eliot attempts, but fails, to impose masculine forms of order on female bodily chaos has been reiterated in a range of feminist and historical readings. As Cassandra Laity puts it in the introduction to the influential collection of essays Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot, in addition to the parts of Eliot's writing which are "blatantly misogynist and homophobic," recent criticism has been keen to understand the more "intricate engagements with multiple forms and degrees of desire, contemporary feminism, the feminine, and homoeroticism." ${ }^{11}$

The last of these terms has been a particularly significant one for arguments that Eliot's poems express his own unacknowledged drives. In 1952 Eliot successfully suppressed an essay by John Peter claiming that The Waste Land depicts the poet's love for Jean Verdenal, whom Peters described as "a young man who soon afterwards met his death, it would seem by drowning." ${ }^{12}$ After Eliot himself had passed away in 1965 Peter

decided to reprint his essay, only with a contradictory caveat attached, explaining that "at Eliot's insistence all copies of the issue on hand after publication were destroyed, and when the run of volumes I-XVI was subsequently re-issued $\ldots$ he refused to sanction the reprinting of my essay" (165). But Peter also insisted that he had never imputed homosexuality or carnal knowledge to Eliot's poetry and had sought Eliot's forgiveness for the mistake. Eliot's offended and aggressive silencing of Peter's essay, and Peter's own recoil from this offence, seemed, in turn, to stifle others on the subject of Eliot's homoeroticism. It was not until 1977, when James E. Miller brought out T. S. Eliot's Personal Waste Land, that anyone mentioned it again. ${ }^{13}$

But as with most attempts to control what people say, Eliot's silencing of Peter merely stimulated curiosity, even if this did not find expression until much later. Since the early 1990s, a number of important studies have analyzed the homoeroticism of Eliot's poetry. Colleen Lamos mounts a dual project in her 1998 book, Deviant Modernism: Sexual and Textual Errancy in T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Marcel Proust. She attempts to move beyond what she calls the "exhausted impasse of the unity versus fragmentation debate" to a more nuanced consideration of those moments in The Waste Land when the writing "strays" from its intentions, a process she describes as a perversion from masculine heterosexual norms: Eliot "struggle[s] against identifications and desires that he considered perverse yet that found symptomatic expression within his own texts." ${ }^{14}$

In a poem, then, defined by the collapse of unified certainties in gender binaries, nationality, belief, and voice, is it worth taking seriously Eliot's claim that the women in the poem aesthetically unite through their gender? If these figures are unified by their femaleness, but disconnected by history, nationality, class, and age, what comprises this unity apart from sheer physical sameness? And what would constitute this physicality? Further, can this category of being override the more obvious ways in which these female figures are defined by their psychological isolation, and are thereby expressive of the disconnections Eliot believed had been unleashed through liberal humanist philosophy and its parallel political ideologies? This essay seeks an answer to these questions by trying to open up and reexamine the language Eliot uses to describe women's disordered physicality. I argue that Eliot tethers female physicality to the obscene, a category that bridges aesthetic and cultural forms of disorder. This bridging means that Eliot's female bodies are both expressive of the cultural and political conflicts Eliot found troubling and a challenge to that cultural and political context. The "one" woman of The Waste Land has more of a critical edge, I want to suggest, than it might seem.

The word "obscene" is from the Latin obscenus, meaning "adverse, inauspicious, ill-omened;" also "abominable, disgusting, filthy and indecent." ${ }^{15}$ The origins of the word incorporate the idea that the obscene thing or word threatens communal unity, and the ideas of contamination and threat were carried through into the word's modern legal and aesthetic meanings. But the word also came to signify that which was offstage, so that the obscene thing or word was seen as that which should not, or could not, be brought on stage, put into writing or brought to consciousness. ${ }^{16}$

Despite the Latin origins of the word and a long and robust history of European writing of sex and sexuality, the production and dissemination of "obscene" writing in Britain and the United States was not significantly policed until the mid- to late-nineteenth century. The UK Obscene Publications Act of 1857 established a new legal basis for the prohibition of obscene literature both in the United Kingdom and the United States. Lord Campbell, the instigator of the act, left it to the courts at common law to devise a definition of literary obscenity. The result was the notoriously vague "Hicklin Ruling" of 1868 , which stipulated that a work was illegal if an isolated passage revealed a "tendency" to "corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences and into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall." ${ }^{17}$ The authorities were particularly concerned about the impact of obscene words on the minds of women and the young person. Further, it was the depiction of sex and the use of sexualized, or "dirty" words, that were considered to be the main threats to "open" minds in the late-nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Most works of fiction, and even the Bible, could be (and were) considered obscene under such criteria, and the result was a legal assault on the dissemination of writing in the late-nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This was partly because powerful pressure groups interested in book control - including the notorious Society for the Suppression of Vice, run by Anthony Comstock in New York, and the National Vigilance Association based in London - were tenacious in their attempts to track down books that they considered to be sexually obscene.

The representation of female and male physicality, then, was a source of moral and literary crisis for Eliot and his generation. Many writers in the I9 Ios and I920s, including James Joyce, Djuna Barnes, Mina Loy, Wyndham Lewis, Ezra Pound, D. H. Lawrence, and others, were asked to cut out sexual and excremental references from poems and novels, either because of fears of legal censorship or due to aesthetic concerns about the proper parameters of literature. Eliot, along with his contemporaries, excised physical references from the early drafts of poems. The Waste Land was much more obviously scatological and sexual in its original form. Base bodily functions - Fresca's "needful stool," the typist's young man who "Delays only to urinate, and

spit," prostitution at Myrtle's place - were edited out of the final version of The Waste Land. ${ }^{18}$ Some of these excisions were prompted by Pound's red pen; others occurred because Eliot changed his mind about including them. These excisions meant that the poem's "unruliness," as Harriet Davidson puts it, was more pronounced in its early drafts: "the textual history of the poem, from draft, to edited version, to published version with endnotes, tends to tame some of the unruliness of the poem," although she leaves it open whether the taming was the result of aesthetic decisions or something external to that - a kind of legalistic pressure. ${ }^{19}$

Censorship, however, did not simply result in the removal of references to prostitution, sex, and excrement in novels and poems. The censorship of literature was also seen by writers of this period as a sinister form of modern bureaucratized power. The censorship of books was controlled by a number of different kinds of people: it was administered by government employees such as customs officials and postmen who policed national borders and internal communication systems; it was controlled by an unofficial network of individuals involved in the production and dissemination of books, which included editors, publishers, publishers' readers, printers and typists; and it was monitored by a general context of cultural reception, which included the published views of reviewers, journalists, and religious leaders. Modernist writers saw the publishing climate of these years as powerfully censorious because of the decentered nature of this network of agents, a fragmentation that made the logic, terms, and agency of censorship uncertain.

Prohibition and threats of prohibition did not deter Eliot and his contemporaries from writing about the body or from incorporating obscene words into their texts; in fact, for some of them the charge of illegality seemed to spur them on to write more explicitly about sex and the body. The intellectual and artistic consequences of this were significant. Many writers, including Eliot, were encouraged to engage with and challenge what were seen as the ridiculous book censorship laws in the United States and United Kingdom. In the process they became champions of authorial free speech. Despite silencing John Peter's essay in the 1950 imputing homoeroticism, Eliot had been critical of literary censorship throughout his life, both when it came to his own work and to that of his contemporaries. He complained when Poetry editor Harriet Monroe removed the word "foetus" from his 1917 poem "Mr. Appolinax" without asking his permission, insisting that this represented an instance of misplaced puritanism. When copies of The Little Review were seized by the postmaster general because of the obscenity of Wyndham Lewis's short story "Cattleman's Spring Mate," Eliot supported the editors of the journal in an essay he penned for The Egoist in 1918. ${ }^{20}$ He signed petitions and wrote a number of essays in support of

Ulysses in the I920s and argued the case for publishing Radclyffe Hall's The Well of Loneliness in Criterion editorials during 1928. ${ }^{21}$ He also protested against the censorship of D. H. Lawrence's paintings in 1929 and offered to appear as an expert witness in the Lady Chatterley's Lover trial in 1960, although in the end he was not called into the witness box. ${ }^{22}$

Eliot was undoubtedly critical of the way that censorship functioned to stifle literary freedom. There were also ways in which the idea of a hypocritical censorious culture made its mark on his writing. He believed that the fragmented structure of the censorship networks controlling the dissemination of texts and the singling out of sexualized obscene words and images as sites of moral corruption were a product of the political and institutional divisions of modern culture. This was significant for his poetry and not least because such divisions were central to his literary criticism, his critique of humanism, and his political skepticism about modern democracy - even while he celebrated aesthetic fragmentation in his poems. At the same time, the pressure of a censorious culture was not simply a negative, prohibitive force that curtailed expression; it also functioned to stimulate the testing of aesthetic limits. Sexual and excremental obscenities could both signify contemporaneity and act as forms of cultural disruption.

Eliot had a lifelong fascination with sexually and racially obscene language and imagery. Loretta Johnson, Gabrielle McIntire, and David Chinitz have argued that Eliot's obscene bawdy poems, of which his Bolo and Lulu poems are the key examples - several of which were first published in The Letters of T. S. Eliot: Volume One in 1988, with more appearing in Christopher Ricks's Inventions of the March Hare in 1996 - should be considered as significant parts of his oeuvre. Johnson situates these poems in a long literary genealogy of bawdy, in which spirituality and fleshiness define each other: Eliot's bawdy poems reveal "the flip side of his spiritual poetry." ${ }^{23}$ McIntire concludes that these poems "necessarily change the ways we read" Eliot, partly because they reveal his "ongoing obsessions with sex, race, and history - concerns that recur in more moderate incarnations through his canonical writings, ${ }^{24}$ and partly because they "play recklessly on prohibitions while offering a satirical poetics of desire and memory" (I3).

Rather than being part of a bawdy aesthetic, the obscene bodies in The Waste Land have a different flavor, partly because the satirical and Rabelaisian elements central to his Bolo poems are absent. Instead, these bodies stand as sites of degradation, animalistic violence and noncommunication. In this they are more akin to the sprawling and menacing bodies that appear in "Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar," "Sweeney Erect" and "Whispers of Immortality," which situate such explorations in a literary genealogy. In "Whispers of Immortality," for instance, Grishkin's

contemporary "feline smell" (27) is identified with a literary heritage originating in John Webster and John Donne, both of whom opened up writing to the "skull beneath the skin" (2). Despite the similarities with the ugly physicality and sexuality of the "Sweeney" poems, however, I want to suggest that the female bodies in The Waste Land form part of a meditation on the obscene, partly because satire and irony make way for a more sustained focus on gender difference and images in which obscene bodies enforce human isolation and miscommunication. McIntire is right to insist that Eliot's obscenities are energized by the prohibitions that define them as obscene. The obscenities in The Waste Land also gesture beyond themselves, to the absence of unifying categories of being that might make such bodies meaningful.

In the first draft version of The Waste Land Eliot describes Fresca's "hearty female stench" ${ }^{25}$ - a phrase that uses foul smell to make the female sexual body disgusting. While Eliot edited this phrase out of the final version of the poem, its powerful evocation of a repellent sensuality that inheres in the female body has wider resonance for The Waste Land, where cloying synthetic odors and clothing barely mask the bodies they conceal. Just as Lil's imagined false set of teeth fail to obscure her decaying mouth, so the confusing synthetic odors of Cleopatra's lush perfumes or the typist's "drying combinations" (225) do not screen the degraded physicality of their sexualized bodies. The effects of this are twofold. While there is a radical disjunction between the body's unpleasant substance and the ostensibly charming accoutrements of feminine masquerade, Eliot also presents the body's processes and impulses as being beyond the individual's control. Both of these disconnections - between the body and its garb, and sheer corporeality and desire - are grounded in a sense of women's shared physicality. The physical stir of sexual desire is thus as inescapable as bodily odor and decay. As well as constituting a particular perspective on the body, this imagery also advocates a theory of history and time since Eliot figures desire as the inescapable starting point for a mythical cycle of decay. The kinds of masquerade used by women may change through the ages, and be a particularly potent focus and form of modernity, but the body beneath has always been both a reproductive prison and a substance subject to decay. As such, bodies, in Eliot's poetry, carry the seeds and the shape of their future deterioration, and even mythical figures do not escape the fateful, physical ravages of time. The Greek figure of Tiresias has always been figured as an old man in poems and plays. But in Eliot's hands his age is visualized through the details of his female physical disintegration - "Old man with wrinkled female breasts" (219). In place of what Johnson describes as the mutually defining relationship of fleshiness and spirituality in Eliot's bawdy poems, then, The Waste

Land erects a different dialectic: physical decay is informed by and pulls against artifice. Keeping in mind the meaning of the obscene cited earlier, we can see how Eliot, by focusing on both the degraded body and its masking, plays with or reflects upon the nature of the obscene. The writing of these physical details exposes what it is that human culture wants to keep hidden about women's bodies. In terms of The Waste Land as a whole, the "strange synthetic perfumes" (87) and "glitter" (84) of Cleopatra's jewels mask - but also fail to mask - the "hearty female stench" that lies beneath. The poem dramatizes the mutually defining dynamic of human physicality and the "glitter" of human artifice. But it also exposes their separation.

Disconnection - of the body from the words or objects that mask it - also informs the images of art in the poem. Physical decay defines and curtails human agency and freedom, and art is connected to images of freedom or escape from the body. Sexualized bodies both imprison women - Lil, after all "nearly died of young George" (160) - and are forms of decay. They are also the foundations for violence and failed communication. Sexual desire is both the "little life" (7) that will make something out of the "nothing" that haunts male-female dialogue ( $120-3$ ), and a form of mythical and modern violence. Both desire and violence constitute forms of life with uncertain destinations. In "A Game of Chess" and "The Fire Sermon" sexual interaction constitutes a supreme instance of psychic isolation, mired as it is in male violence and female fear. While the story of Philomel's "change" allows her to escape into animalistic form, however, Eliot describes the enduring fixity of her fate in myth and art - "And still she cried, and still the world pursues" (102). In Greek and Roman myth, after she is raped by Tereus, Philomel has her tongue cut out and is hidden in a fortress, before being turned into a swallow (in Greek versions) or a nightingale (according to Latin authors) and escaping. This is a moment in which sexual violence instigates a myth of human turning animal. Of course, Greek myths abound in such crossovers. But in Eliot's hands the animalistic flight away from human confinement has aesthetic resonance. Ideas of freedom in The Waste Land tend to involve images of momentary flight or movement frozen in artistic time. Pictorially Philomel will always be flying away from her human mutilation and toward that window, just as Marie's ephemeral feeling of freedom as she descends the mountain will poetically endure.

Again, this dialectic of sexual violence and desire and freedom partly centers on time. Female bodies in The Waste Land, controlled as they are by their physical subjection to time express what is unconscious and blinded. The ability to transcend this subjection to violence and decay involves creating an art or song or language that communicates across time. But this transposition of meaning is thwarted by modern life. Art can only resonate

in the present if its beauty can be heard or understood. Eliot had long been preoccupied poetically with the idea of misdirected or indecipherable beauty. Prufrock, for instance, knows that the mermaids are singing but does not think that they will sing to him: "I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each. // I do not think that they will sing to me" (I24-5). In "Sweeney Among the Nightingales," meanwhile, the mythical "hornèd gate" (8) that leads up from Hades is guarded by the apelike Sweeney, and the stars are "veiled" (Io) from the poem's various characters. Rather than gazing upward at the stars or listening to the nightingales singing, these inebriated characters look at each other through windows and doors. These barriers enforce the poem's suggestion that human proximity produces silence, suspicion, withdrawal, and isolation.

This modern experience of being shut off from the wonder and transcendent beauty of song is one that Eliot makes explicitly physical in The Waste Land. Even though the nightingale "Filled all the desert with inviolable voice" (IOI) this song is translated into its imitative representation: "'Jug Jug'" (IO3). But Eliot also connects this translation of voice into language with blocked hearing: the voice is "'Jug Jug' to dirty ears" (IO3). Here, Eliot implies that the body, by being clogged up by dirt and waste, is a barrier to beauty and meaning. Song also fails to signify in "The Fire Sermon" when its tones are drowned out by the "rattle of the bones" (I86), chuckles, and sexualized "horns and motors" of men pursuing prostitutes (197). At other moments in the poem, Eliot attends to linguistic, rather than acoustic, barriers, but the focus is still on obscured or failing body parts. The poet's eyes fail, as does his voice and mind, when confronted by the hyacinth girl (38-9). A similar set of failures occurs in his interactions with the woman whose "nerves are bad:" "'Do / You know nothing? / Do you see nothing? Do you remember / Nothing?'" (I2I-3). The verbal and psychological barriers between men and women are here concentrated on deficiencies of sight and voice. In a different part of the poem absence and disconnection are expressed by way of sordid physical images. In one instance, the "nothing" is likened to "The broken fingernails of dirty hands" (303).

Eliot was not alone among his peers in writing about the physically degraded and physical limitations of the human form, as well as about the details of dirty or decomposing bodies. In James Joyce's and Franz Kafka's hands such failures are part of their meditations on urban poverty and bureaucratic structures. Stephen's decaying teeth and unwashed body form part of Joyce's descriptions both of Dublin's colonial status and its urban poverty, while in Kafka's narratives the filthy and confining offices of the bureaucrats enforce the enervating fact of urban crowding and industrial overproduction.

In The Waste Land dirty bodies form part of Eliot's more general focus on the ubiquity of modern waste, while his malodorous and unseemly bodies and clogged ears and eyes make communication difficult. The body, in Eliot's hands, is its own corruption. Bodily functions, odors, and dirt thereby constitute a shared human physicality. At the same time, however, the body secures the barriers separating individuals. Ezra Pound picked up on both the shared, animalistic nature of Eliot's sexualized bodies and their isolating force - what he labels as their absence of attraction - when he observed of The Waste Land: "Breedings of animals, / Humans and canibals [sic], / But above all else of smells / Without attraction." ${ }^{26}$ Not only are the female bodies in The Waste Land obscene in the semantic, rather than strictly legal, sense of the word - disgusting, filthy, and indecent - they also embody a key contradiction. At once the substance of a shared humanity, they also serve to isolate.

The obscene female body, then, connects to Eliot's wider philosophical and political reflections on the contradictions of modern culture. The problem of isolation was central to Eliot's philosophical and political arguments. Richard Shusterman discusses the impact of Eliot's doctoral thesis on the work of F. H. Bradley, in which Eliot includes an entire chapter on solipsism, what Bradley referred to as the "finite centre" of individual consciousness. ${ }^{27}$ This philosophical meditation formed part of Eliot's more general interest in the clear distinctions between private truths and external authority. In later critical essays and poems Eliot focuses more attention on the problematic subjectivism of Romantic and humanist philosophy and poetry. As Shusterman suggests, such distinctions pose a problem both for human communication and community, and this idea plays out fruitfully in Eliot's early poems such as "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" and "Portrait of a Lady" which focus on human misunderstanding and isolation. The ironized social failures of these early poems echo only faintly in the brutalized interactions of The Waste Land, though, where the woman whose "nerves are bad" (i i i) bullies her interlocutor with unanswerable questions and the typist indifferently turns away from her lover to seek her own image in the mirror. If dialogues often seem at cross-purposes in the early poems, the failure of communication has become even more pronounced in The Waste Land. Here sexual interaction prompts disconnected self-reflection rather than emotional intimacy. The "nothing" that resonates through the poem more generally signifies an absence of knowledge and connection between men and women. If Madame Sosostris "Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe" (45) then the language of the poem implies that this is because her knowledge and wisdom are debased categories.

If women are "one" in their shared physical substance, then, this oneness exposes the absence of meaningful connections in The Waste Land. The failed dialogues and psychological isolation of the poem are the foundation for Eliot's explorations into what makes humans connect. He argues that meaningful kinds of unity have been replaced by false and empty forms of order - linked to democratic process, law, and bureaucracy. His depictions of women in The Waste Land form part of this reflection. I have argued here that women in The Waste Land are held together by nothing other than the oneness of their shared and obscene physicality, a construction of the physical that connects to Eliot's more general theory of human substance and humanism. Eliot's critique of humanism resides partly in his skepticism about how, in the absence of moral or religious hierarchies of meaning, the physical stuff of the human body can be a route to political or moral freedom. Freedom, for Eliot, entails class and national belonging. T. E. Hulme, in one of his last published essays on humanism, echoes Pound's focus on the animalistic substance of Eliot's bodies in The Waste Land when he claims that the human "is the only exit from the animal world." ${ }^{18}$ For both Hulme and Eliot this human exit requires the meaningful divisions of moral order and authority. For Eliot, however, the cultural and class dissociations of modern life have destabilized these divisions. His critique of humanism was partly connected to the idea that liberal culture had produced a fragmented and legalistic moral sphere empty of significance, a series of connections which defined his defense of classicism, monarchism, tradition and religion. He also, as we see above, viewed the modern literary censorship of obscene words and images as an important form of empty moralism and cultural fragmentation, and a threat to the freedom of poets and novelists. The obscene bodies of The Waste Land capture the conflicts of cultural fragmentation and moral emptiness; they are both fleshy symbols of the barriers separating individuals and represent a challenge to the moralism of modern censoriousness which wants nothing but to hide the body.

The focus on the obscene body as the ground of a shared human substance also features in Eliot's essayistic critiques of social and cultural fragmentation. He produces a vivid picture of the moral consequences of disintegrating class divisions in 1923, for instance, when he argues that "the middle classes are morally corrupt" and in "England as elsewhere, under democracy, are morally dependent upon the aristocracy," which in turn are "subordinate" to the middle classes. ${ }^{29}$ The lower classes, meanwhile, are dropping "into the same state of protoplasm as the bourgeoisie" (Ibid.). This vision of class breakdown - in another context he states that "there will soon be only one class" - echoes the imagery of moral collapse and degraded physicality that marks The Waste Land. ${ }^{30}$ Class homogenization, for Eliot, creates not

meaningful unity but the sameness of meaningless protoplasmic life, just as the merging of Cleopatra into Madame Sosostris or the typist produces a unity of being empty of significance.

But the obscene protoplasmic life that constitutes the ground of female being in The Waste Land is also, as North puts it in the quotation at the beginning of this chapter, a "necessary moment" (IO4) in the process of arriving at a new kind of significance or order. And this imagined order might be seen less as a gendered binary imposed by Eliot on his women and men, and more as the beauty or poetic language which arises out of human substance - in The Waste Land this unity is described as artifice, as well as meaningful song, art, or language. By signifying through time, poetry connects humans to the past and to each other and also transcends the divisions of protoplasmic life. My contention in this essay has been that this meaningful poetic language is also linked to a freedom from the empty constraint of a modern bureaucratized censorship that hounds down the obscene words of literary texts. The shared physicality of Eliot's poetic women constitutes a poetic challenge to this constraint.

# NOTES 

I T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land, T. S. Eliot: The Complete Poems and Plays (1969; London: Faber and Faber, 1987), footnote to line 218. Subsequent references to Eliot's poems will be made parenthetically by line number.
2 F. R. Leavis, New Bearings in English Poetry: A Study of the Contemporary Situation (Middlesex: Penguin, 1972), 73. James Longenbach argues that Tiresias embodies a mystic unifying vision in Modernist Poetics of History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987), 203.
3 Political readings of the poem's fragmentation include Raymond Williams, Culture and Society: 1780-1950 (1958; New York: Columbia University Press, 1983); Terry Eagleton, Exiles and Émigrés (New York: Schocken, 1970); Sanford Schwartz, The Matrix of Modernism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985); Michael Levenson, A Genealogy of Modernism: A Study of English Literary Doctrine 1908-1922 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984); Michael North, The Political Aesthetic of Yeats, Eliot, and Pound (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991); Stan Smith, The Origins of Modernism: Eliot, Pound, Yeats and the Rhetorics of Renewal (London: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1994).
4 For important arguments along these lines see Maud Ellmann, The Poetics of Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound (Brighton: Harvester, 1987), and Christine Froula, Modernism's Body: Sex, Culture and Joyce (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996).
5 See Richard Shusterman, T. S. Eliot and the Philosophy of Literary Criticism (London: Duckworth, 1988); Manju Jain, T. S. Eliot and American Philosophy: The Harvard Years (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992); Jeffrey Perl, Skepticism and Modern Enmity: Before and After Eliot (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989); M. A. R. Habib, The

Early T. S. Eliot and Western Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
6 Michael Coyle, "'Fishing, with the arid plain behind me:' Difficulty, Deferral, and Form in The Waste Land," A Companion to T. S. Eliot, ed. David Chinitz (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), 158.
7 Influential readings of this kind include Marja Palmer, Men and Women in T. S. Eliot's Early Poetry (Lund: Lund University Press, 1996); Lyndall Gordon, T. S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life (London: Vintage, 1998); and Ronald Schuchard, Eliot's Dark Angel: Intersections of Life and Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
8 Foremost among these critics are Susan Gilbert and Sandra Gubar. See No Man's Land: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994), and Rachel Blau DuPlessis, Genders, Races, and Religious Cultures in Modern American Poetry, 1908-1934 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
9 Michael Tratner, Modernism and Mass Politics: Joyce, Woolf, Eliot, Yeats (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995); Peter Nicholls, Modernisms: A Literary Guide (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1995).
Io Tony Pinkney, Women in the Poetry of T. S. Eliot: A Psychoanalytic Approach (London: Macmillan, 1984), 18.
II Cassandra Laity, "Introduction: Eliot, gender, and modernity," Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot, ed. Cassandra Laity and Nancy K. Gish (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 3.
12 John Peter, "A New Interpretation of The Waste Land (1952)," Essays in Criticism 19 (1969): 143.
13 James Miller, T. S. Eliot's Personal Waste Land: Exorcism of the Demons (London: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1977).
14 Colleen Lamos, Deviant Modernism: Sexual and Textual Errancy in T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Marcel Proust (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), IIO, I.
15 The Compact Edition of the OED, vol. I (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), 1966.

16 SeeFeliceFlaneryLewis,Literature, Obscenity and the Law (Carbondale:Southern Illinois University Press, 1976).
17 Quoted in Donald Thomas, A Long Time Burning: The History of Literary Censorship in England (London: Routledge \& Kegan Paul, 1969), 264.
18 The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 23, line 12; 35, line 180; 5, lines 19 and ff.
19 Harriet Davidson, "Improper desire: reading The Waste Land," The Cambridge Companion to T. S. Eliot, ed. A. David Moody (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 124.
20 "Mr. Appolinax" was originally published in Poetry 8 no. 6 (September 1916), 292-5. For details of the excision see T. S. Eliot to John Quinn, March 4, 1918, in The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume One, 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot (London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988), 223.
21 Eliot, "Literature and the American Courts," The Egoist 3 no. 5 (March 1918): 39 .

22 See Peter Ackroyd, T. S. Eliot (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1993), 33 I.
23 Loretta Johnson, "T. S. Eliot's Bawdy Verse: Lulu, Bolo and More Ties," Journal of Modern Literature 27 no. I/2 (Fall 2003): 24 [14-25].
24 Gabrielle McIntire, Modernism, Memory, and Desire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 38.
25 The Waste Land: A Facsimile, 39, line 4I.
26 Ezra Pound to T. S. Eliot, December 24, 1921, in The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume One, 498-9.
27 See Richard Shusterman, "Eliot as Philosopher," in A. David Moody, ed., The Cambridge Companion to T. S. Eliot (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 35 .

28 T. E. Hulme, "A Notebook," Further Speculations, ed. Sam Hynes (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1962), 182.
29 Eliot, Selected Essays, 3rd ed. (1932; London: Faber and Faber, 1976), 458.
30 Eliot, "Prolegomena to Poetry," Dial 70 (1921): 45 I.
