# IO 

RICHARD BADENHAUSEN

## Trauma and Violence in The Waste Land

One would be hard-pressed to locate a modernist poem more animated by trauma and violence than The Waste Land. Wounded bodies and fractured minds face readers at every turn in the form of rape victims such as Philomela and the typist, war veterans struggling desperately in their relationships, and powerless women like Lil, a mother of five who flounders under crushing circumstances that have aged her prematurely and nearly caused her death. Cadavers, as material embodiments of the effects of violence, also litter the poem's landscape: the "crowd" of the "undone" dead flowing over London Bridge (62-3), the "corpse" planted a year ago in Stetson's garden (71), the "dead men [who] lost their bones" (I 16) in "rats' alley" (I 15), Lil's aborted fetus (159), and Phlebas the Phoenician, whose bones are being "Picked" over by the currents of the sea (316), are just a few examples. ${ }^{1}$ The prophet Tiresias lingers over these horrible events as witness, trying to manage and process them; yet he ends up only highlighting his own impotence and perpetual suffering by identifying with the anguish of The Waste Land's victims but not possessing the capability of relieving their misery.

The poem self-consciously evokes the catastrophic First World War that had ended a few years earlier, yet it does not engage those events directly, instead choosing to contemplate the devastating effects of the conflict on individual bodies and minds and the deadened landscape they inhabit. The many allusions in the poem - themselves a product of violent action, cut off from their original textual bodies and repositioned to serve Eliot's aims - also educe a consistent narrative of extratextual trauma and violence. Those references center on works by Jessie Weston, Gérard de Nerval, Dante, Shakespeare, and Thomas Kyd that turn on tales of loss, violence, trauma, and mourning. Even the poem's original title, "He Do the Police in Different Voices" from Charles Dickens's Our Mutual Friend, and its initial epigraph, Kurtz's culminating cry, "the horror, the horror," from Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, suggest that a state of emergency and trauma hangs over The Waste Land. In these ways

the poem stands as one of the monumental edifices to the brutal effects of modernity. Such violence, though, is difficult to process in The Waste Land because Eliot often elides the causes of his speakers' psychological damage. Only in rare cases are the actual perpetrators of violence even named. ${ }^{2}$ Instead, the poem concentrates on the victims and their struggles, but the accompanying originary wounding narratives seem frustratingly out of reach. That is, the poem's emphasis is on suffering itself "I Tiresias have foresuffered all" (243) - rather than on the origins of that anguish in violent encounters.

The most compelling discussion of violence in modernist literature happens to be one of the most recent: Sara Cole's brilliant examination of the manner in which violence offers an occasion for literary triumph through its ability to propel and animate texts, though that process is also freighted with the horror and shame that accompanies acknowledgment of the modern world's brutality. In At the Violet Hour: Modernism and Violence in England and Ireland - a title that borrows the phrase "At the violet hour" directly from The Waste Land - Cole reveals how modernist "literary works created intricate, often exquisite formal solutions to the challenges posed by violence," and she traces "how violent events enhanced as well as deformed their structures and surfaces." ${ }^{3}$ She locates modernism's attempts to formalize violence in its art and argues that the resultant tensions of that project can best be understood through the competing terms of "enchantment" and "disenchantment" (39). The latter notion grows out of Friedrich Schiller's and Max Weber's critique of a modern world overly determined by technology, capitalism, mass culture, and rationalism - conditions that led to the "large-scale diminishment of sacredness" (40). A literature of enchantment thus emerges in the early twentieth century "to provide beauty and imaginative release where there is brutality and suffering" (40). These works operate by "[h]ealing, enriching, [and] creating memorable visual forms to capture terrible realities" (40). Central to Cole's argument is The Waste Land, a poem that reflects "on the troubling relationship between art, with its core commitment to beautiful forms, and the violence that has wrecked human life throughout history" (80). Cole believes The Waste Land does not resolve this contradiction but rather recognizes that art "trades on" the power of violence, "at times appropriating its force and creating something especially brilliant, at other times succumbing to the sheer ruin that violence leaves in its wake" (8I). Ultimately, Cole sees violence as crucially important to modernist art because it possesses the capability of enacting "magical transformation" (39) of the sort most powerfully memorialized in the Christian crucifixion and resurrection narrative, where horrific violence brings about redemption.

148

Cole's reading is a true tour de force. It offers a bold, imaginative paradigm for understanding the manner in which modernism was both repulsed and fascinated by violence and for appreciating the ways in which the architectonics of its works were built on the foundations of this tension. Yet I would like to push a bit against this model by putting a thumb on one side of the scale, so to speak, to propose that Eliot's poem is tipped far more toward disenchantment than enchantment. I see a poem distressed by violence but not redeemed by the artistic project that underlies it. My reading suggests a work that is intensely preoccupied with the various blockages that occur when victims struggle to recover from wounding experiences, a work that emphatically displays how trauma represents a stark dead end. Three key facets of the poem demonstrate Eliot insistently turning away from the ostensible enchantment of violence and the consolations that can stem from such magical transformations in favor of underscoring the many ways that recovery from trauma is maddeningly impeded. First, Tiresias hovers over the various traumatic histories of other characters as a fellow sufferer, yet he is unable to make anything happen due to his status as a secondary witness - one who overly identifies with the wounding narratives of other victims - and his position as a prophet: while he can envision traumatic events in the future, he is unable to halt them when they occur in the present. Second, Eliot constructs part IV of the poem, "Death by Water," as a failed elegy - a self-conscious occasion to highlight the nature of disrupted mourning and turn away from the consolation typically generated by the genre. Finally, the poem offers a stark examination of post-war traumatic shock and its destructive effects upon intimate relationships in the frustrating dialogue between what seems to be husband and wife that sits at the middle of part II, "A Game of Chess." Although I agree with Cole that The Waste Land aspires to find a way out of the disruptions associated with violence, particularly in its final section focused on recovery, I envision a much more vexed outcome and a poem that struggles to endorse the larger redemptive project alluded to in the preface to Eliot's notes or in the poem's final lines.

# Tiresias as Impotent Witness 

Tiresias's own history turns on a series of wounding events. Blinded by Juno for offering a displeasing answer to her question about whether men or women experience more pleasure during sex, the prophet's hermaphroditic past is tied to a punitive transfiguration that resulted from his having struck two snakes copulating. He carries the marks of those traumas in Eliot's poem via both his "wrinkled dugs" (228), which signify his transformation into a woman, and his ability to foresee the future - the latter capability a gift

from Jupiter to counter Juno's punishment. Tiresias thus exists as a displaced character, one incapable of grounding himself in home, relationships, or a comforting history. He is not only "throbbing between two lives" (218), a reference to his own confusing history, but he is stuck mediating the many traumas of those who populate the poem, including the typist, Philomela, and Lil. When Eliot suggests that what Tiresias "sees, in fact, is the substance of the poem" (note 218), he is proposing that the prophet acts as a kind of trauma clearinghouse in which are stored many different traumatic histories of individual victims. Tiresias's central experience is the witnessing of death, sexual violence, and devastation on an immense scale, which is why he remarks that he has "foresuffered all / Enacted on this same divan or bed" (243-4) - his witnessing is tied directly to suffering. In other words, he has been subjected to earlier traumatizing events and now reexperiences the pain of those moments as other injured parties either dramatize their wounding or retell their stories. Additionally, because Tiresias possesses, like all prophets, foreknowledge of the poem's events, he carries the immense burden of perceiving injuries that are yet to come. The prophet hovers both within and outside the poem's wounding events, observing, listening, and identifying with the civic and social anguish taking place. Tiresias is able to unite "all the rest" (note 218) not through speaking the words of victims, but by becoming the central site of emotional wounding in the poem.

Tiresias embodies a situation described by trauma theorist Dori Laub, who explains that "the listener to trauma comes to be a participant and co-owner of the traumatic event: through his very listening, he comes to partially experience trauma in himself." ${ }^{+}$This so-called secondary witnessing represents the danger faced by analysts who cannot help but be affected by the power of traumatic narratives; such listening, explains Laub, "leaves ... no hiding place intact" (72). One becomes a fellow possessor of the event who thus runs the risk of partially experiencing it and even identifying with that trauma. Dominick LaCapra has also written extensively about the hazards of secondary witnessing, highlighting the great difficulty that emerges "when the virtual experience involved in empathy gives way to vicarious victimhood, and empathy with the victim seems to become an identity." ${ }^{5}$ Later, LaCapra points out how it "is dubious to identify with the victim to the point of making oneself a surrogate victim who has a right to the victim's voice or subject position" (78). Tiresias possesses a unique problem in this regard: as a prophet who has privileged access to the traumatic knowledge of his fellow victims that no other analyst would have, he has a much more difficult time respecting the subject boundaries delineated by Laub and LaCapra. As LaCapra notes, the analyst must acknowledge himself as a separate individual who "possesses his own separate place, position

and perspective" (58). Eliot's insistence that Tiresias is implicated and even involved in the trauma experienced by the typist at the hands of the "young man carbuncular" (23I) when the prophet intrudes to note "I too awaited the expected guest" (230) and parenthetically interrupts the moment of violation by signaling his own suffering, thus blurs identities and literally drives Tiresias into occupying the subject positions of the poem's other victims. This move thereby demonstrates the danger of becoming a co-owner of the wounding event, offering a paradigmatic example for how Tiresias envisions his implication in the lives of others.

Prophets like Tiresias bear the burden of knowledge, but they typically are powerless to act on that knowledge, as is the case in Oedipus Rex. They are curiously paralyzed figures, and in The Waste Land, Tiresias alludes to the long scope of the heavy weight of his co-suffering when he reminds the reader that these trials have been taking place for over three millennia: "I who have sat by Thebes below the wall / And walked among the lowest of the dead" (245-6) - a reference to his role in Book II of The Odyssey when he helps Odysseus understand in the Underworld what awaits him upon rejoining the living when he returns home to Ithaca. This timeless feature of Tiresias's relationship to trauma ensures that he will remain stuck in that position. As LaCapra has pointed out, one of the key components of working through trauma is for the victim to find a way in which she can distinguish between past and present and say to herself that it may not be possible to escape entirely from earlier events, but to be able to affirm, "I'm existing here and now, and this is different from back then" (I44). Yet given that Tiresias has "foresuffered all" and knows that in the future similar woundings will take place, there is no way he can make those distinctions between past and present that are crucial to recovery. As LaCapra observes, gaining critical distance from a trauma ultimately entails "distinguish[ing] between past, present, and future" (I43), which are distinctions that Tiresias fails to make in his compulsive reenactment of trauma as he "does" the different voices in an intense identification with the many wounding events he has witnessed.

# Elegy, Mourning, and the Refusal of Consolation 

The Waste Land can be read on one level as a poem about mourning, particularly due to its publication on the heels of the devastation that had taken place during World War I, and the fighting that continued to rage on in other conflicts like the Greco-Turkish war. Jay Winter has pointed out that the First World War "brought the search for an appropriate language of loss to the centre of cultural and political life," and I agree with other critics that Eliot is explicitly participating in this conversation. ${ }^{6}$ Eliot is interested in the

challenges associated with acknowledging death and processing the difficult emotions that accompany it, especially when the location of the corpse is remote or unknown. Such emotional reckoning with death has been managed in many cultures via elegiac forms, and in his important study of the modern elegy, Jahan Ramazani proposes that The Waste Land be read as a "covert elegy," ${ }^{7}$ though he does not settle decisively on the specific loss the poem is attempting to overcome, proposing a variety of possibilities that include Jean Verdenal, Eliot's father, the collective dead of the First World War, or even Western civilization itself. In the three paragraphs he devotes to Eliot's poem, Ramazani argues that Eliot disguises his elegiac purposes as a way of avoiding a too-close association with "his mournful personae" (26) while still undergirding the effort with strong debts to Whitman's elegy for Abraham Lincoln and John Milton's elegy for Edward King. Yet I see the poem taking up the elegiac project much more directly in "Death by Water" by asking how individuals process loss - in this case, the death of Phlebas the Phoenician - and, more importantly, by interrogating the problems inherent in that grieving project. In this respect, the whole poem can be understood as a "site of mourning" - to use Winter's suggestive phrase about the various devices (linguistic and otherwise) that helped mediate bereavement after the war - one that provides a structure for responses to trauma. Such a reading also views The Waste Land as anticipating Peter Sacks's valuable exploration of elegiac conventions as "literary versions of specific social and psychological practices." ${ }^{8}$ For the purposes of my argument, though, what is most important about Eliot's manipulation of elegy is that he is refusing the redemptive possibilities embedded in a poetic form whose overt goal is to trade on the power of art to transform suffering into solace.

While Jahan Ramazani has identified a number of echoes of well-known elegies in The Waste Land, and other critics have provided some suggestive readings that locate elegiac strains in the poem, I view "Death by Water" as a corrupted elegy, an elegy gone bad, one that collapses due to the psychological deficiencies of its speaker and Eliot's refusal to attach any possibility of transcendence or consolation to this death due to his interest in the nature of disrupted mourning. ${ }^{9}$ Here it is in full:

Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead, Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell And the profit and loss.

A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell He passed the stages of his age and youth Entering the whirlpool.

Gentile or Jew

O you who turn the wheel and look to windward, Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.

Like many elegies, this section of The Waste Land makes much of the name of the deceased, though in this case the speaker dispenses with the typical invocation of some outside inspiration, such as a divine being or force of nature, and gets right to the point by keying in on "Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead" (3I2). That line echoes in a number of ways Milton's "For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime," ${ }^{10}$ including the similar sounding name, the emphasis on "dead" - through repetition in Milton's case and its position at the end of a line in Eliot's case - a like number of syllables, and even a parallel placement of a medial caesura. But aside from their central subjects both sharing the same fate of drowning, the poems could not be more dissimilar. Whereas traditional elegies are sustained over an extended number of lines so as to allow for the emotional buildup on which the genre depends (and which it exploits), Eliot offers a brutally succinct treatment that is cut off after ten lines.

This abruptness - as it relates to the aborted nature of this particular case of mourning - is yet another success achieved by Ezra Pound's editing of this section. He encouraged Eliot to eradicate the drawn-out maritime narrative, which, in an early draft, had concentrated the elegiac focus of the final lines that originally served as a response or coda to the sailor's call to "Remember me" - surely an explicit allusion to the command of the Ghost of Hamlet's father at the end of act I of Hamlet. ${ }^{11}$ Whereas most classic elegies adopt a formal diction and tone, Eliot's version employs a direct, colloquial vocabulary and informal attitude. The subjects of most elegies are also treated with great reverence - this is expressed often in a laudatory review of the deceased's accomplishments - but Eliot's speaker offers no praise and instead indicts Phlebas: he "Forgot the cry of gulls" (313). Edward King's role in his own death is excused by Milton due to the unreliability of the ship in which he sailed, yet Phlebas's passing is simply accepted. Instead of idealizing the dead body as Milton does ("flote upon his watry bear," 12), Eliot treats his corpse with a lack of discretion: "A current under sea / Picked his bones in whispers" (315-6).

While the universe of Milton's poem is inhabited by a comforting mix of classical deities and a Christian afterlife that ensures a secure place in eternity for the fallen soul, Phlebas exists in a world of materiality that makes no promises about life after death beyond the fact of a decaying body. Nor does Eliot's speaker express any anger about the death or toward any unfeeling gods or forces of nature that might have brought it about; instead, the event is gazed on with a flat, affectless

eye. In fact, there is a kind of detached impassivity running through the entire account. As Sacks points out, the "movement from loss to consolation ... requires a deflection of desire" (7); but one of the recurring features of The Waste Land is how often potentially charged emotional moments are accompanied by "indifference" (242), to use a word associated with the typist during her sexual encounter with the young man carbuncular. Such impairment impedes the consolatory project from getting under way. While conventional elegies tend to progress toward the discovery of a universal truth, Eliot's lament not only parodies that convention in its last three lines, but it cautions the audience ("Consider Phlebas ...") rather than offering the consolation that is the ultimate objective of the form. Instead of peaceful, soothing closure, the poem and its abrupt conclusion seem to have facilitated a kind of melancholic paralysis in which loss cannot be processed properly. This positions the poem, then, as a type of anti-elegy, a representation of trauma that elucidates the devastation of being blocked emotionally. Not only is Eliot demonstrating his poetic skill in transfiguring the genre, but he is also turning its conventions against themselves as a way of revealing the dislocations so often caused by trauma. He locates his speaker in the position of elegist, but then repeatedly obstructs the usual pathways to successful consolation. This resituates the focus of the poem away from the potential redemptive qualities of aesthetic responses to violence and more squarely on the suffering of victims subject to that violence. ${ }^{12}$

# War and the Domestication of Trauma 

The Waste Land shares with much Great War literature a concern with the psychological effects of modern combat. In particular, Eliot's poem is interested in exploring the damage wrought upon male-female relationships as a result of the war, fixating on the absence of intimacy between partners whose physical and psychological experiences have diverged so radically that they find themselves faced with a debilitating emotional distance. Vera Brittain, the early twentieth-century writer and pacifist, worried that the war might provoke just such a loss of emotional connection with her fiancé, Roland, who eventually died in battle. In her memoir, Testament of Youth (1933), she recounts a "fear that the War would come between us - as indeed, with time, the War always did, putting a barrier of indescribable experience between men and the women whom they loved, thrusting horror deeper and deeper inward." ${ }^{13}$

Eliot received quite a bit of firsthand information about the horrors of combat from Maurice Haigh-Wood, Vivien Eliot's brother, who spoke

frankly about his service in the infantry with the Manchester Regiment. Eliot's brother-in-law sought to explain in a letter from June 1917 the apparent "complete indifference" of those who had fought at the front as an "attitude, a screen" that resulted from the moral impossibility of relating "unspeakable tragedies" to those "uninitiated" civilians at home who had not experienced them. ${ }^{14}$ Haigh-Wood then continues to give the reader a taste of why veterans might avoid such accounts, noting the grimness of the subject matter: the "swollen and blackening corpses of hundreds of young men," the "appalling stench of rotting carrion," fellow soldiers "with bowels dropping out, lungs shot away, with blinded, smashed faces, or limbs blown into space," and "Wounded men hanging in agony on the barbed wire, until a friendly spout of liquid fire shrivels them up like a fly in a candle" (Ibid., 205). Eliot was taken enough by the letter that he forwarded it to the editor of The Nation two weeks after its receipt, believing it would interest readers by helping to explain why soldiers were reluctant to talk about their experiences. Published a few days later, Haigh-Wood's account served as a challenge to official restrictions that sought to sanitize the home front by removing any trace of wounded and destroyed bodies, a condition critic Allyson Booth identifies as "the problem of corpselessness." ${ }^{15}$ This gesture also anticipates Eliot's move in The Waste Land to restore the presence of corpses by making them more visible against the various settings of the poem, whether they take the form of Stetson's corpse (7I), the dead men from "rats' alley" (II5), "bones cast in a little low dry garret" (194), the remains of Phlebas's body in the "current under sea" (315), or most explicitly, "the little light dead people," ${ }^{16}$ which was an excised line from "A Game of Chess." Eliot is interrogating the difficulty for veterans of returning home to an environment unprepared to deal with their problems. Of particular interest to him is the manner in which domestic spaces are inhospitable to traumatized soldiers struggling to reconcile their wartime experiences with the very different demands of civilian life.

Eliot's poem, of course, contains an explicit reference to a married couple whose relationship is under pressure as a consequence of the war. In the final scene of "A Game of Chess," we overhear an anonymous female speaker relating the story of her friend Lil, whose husband Albert has just been demobilized after his wartime service. Lil is physically ravaged as a result of the burdens of motherhood and other domestic pressures: she's had five children, of which the last almost killed her; she has had an abortion; she has some serious dental problems; and at age thirty-one she already appears so "antique" (156) that her spouse "can't bear to look" at her (146). In spite of those liabilities, Albert still "wants a good time" (148) with Lil, though other women are apparently ready to satisfy him sexually if his wife does

not. An apt portrayal of the havoc wreaked upon marriages by the recent war, Eliot's scene ends with an evocation of Ophelia's penultimate departing words in act IV, scene 5 of Hamlet, which grounds the preceding marital portrait within the tradition of tragic love relationships that have collapsed due to miscommunication, misunderstanding, and a lack of intimacy. It will not be long, the allusion hints, before Lil will be compelled to destroy herself in perhaps the same fashion as Ophelia, and the poem's incessant reminder of "Death by Water" only reinforces the likelihood of that fate. Indeed, the tale about Lil is interrupted ominously - overtaken by the pub keeper's repeated cry of last call, "HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME" - its denouement swallowed up because "A Game of Chess" is ending, and all we are left with is a blank white space before the start of the next section of the poem.

Lil and Albert's story, though, is not the only examination of post war relationship struggles in the poem. Viewing the exchange that precedes the pub scene (beginning "'My nerves are bad to-night,'" III) through the subsequent information revealed by Lil's friend allows one to surmise that this conversation takes place between a male-female couple - albeit a more genteel version - that is also experiencing serious problems as a result of the husband's war service. Although this moment in the poem has typically been read as a series of questions framed by quotation marks that go unanswered by the male companion and are instead merely constructed as silent responses in his head (because no quotation marks appear around his lines), I offer a reading that imagines both sides of this tête-à-tête being verbalized. While my interpretation can be sustained even if the male speaker's lines are merely thought rather than articulated - he becomes, then, simply a numbed, unresponsive veteran, a silent victim lost on his own island of suffering - it suggests a male speaker who is a more active agent actually interested in reaching out and making progress. The fact that his wife fails to recognize his desires to communicate and connect makes this deteriorating marriage even more dysfunctional and tragic, though this schism between marital partners demonstrates that successful homecomings were often almost impossible for traumatized soldiers.

The dramatic dialogue in part II gets underway when an unnamed female confesses to having bad "nerves" (III), code at the time for a hysterical condition. She uses the excuse to demand that her male partner remain at her side. The complaint quickly turns, however, to a condemnation of the companion's inability to speak and share his thoughts: "'What are you thinking of? What thinking? What? / I never know what you are thinking. Think'" (II3-4). This might initially seem like a petty grievance that occasionally surfaces in most marriages, but this male character has shut down emotionally and is failing to communicate as a result of some significant trauma.

His reply only confirms that sense: "I think we are in rats' alley / Where the dead men lost their bones" (I 15 -6). The apparent non sequitur, even though he picks up on the earlier word "think," actually fits when understood as surfacing out of the dislocation often experienced by traumatized veterans. In addition, the reference to "rats' alley" is consistent with such a background, since that expression was a common wartime name for a trench, where corpses sat at the mercy of rats picking away at limbs. ${ }^{17}$ In using such slang, the male speaker is also falling back on language that further highlights the gulf between veterans and civilians, between male combatants and women. Helping to reinforce that chasm, rather than responding to this rather remarkable vision, the female speaker returns to her own anxieties, asking a series of questions about noises she hears, which are dismissed by her companion as "nothing" (I20). Once again, the wife goes on the attack: "'Do / You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember / Nothing?' " (I2I-3).

Ironically, the distressed wife criticizes her partner's inability to recollect experience immediately following his memory of fallen colleagues, though this again demonstrates the severe miscommunication taking place. She is honing in on a central feature of returning veterans' impairment, namely their inability to share with civilians the details of their experience. War veterans often felt that those remaining at home could never understand the horrors of their fighting. Language itself often seemed inadequate in capturing the essence of their suffering, and they themselves actually did not remember due to the various dislocations experienced by trauma victims. As one character in Henri Barbusse's war memoir Under Fire explains, we are "machines of forgetting," an acknowledgment that arrives as a result of another character asserting, "everything we've seen is too much. We're not built to take all this in." ${ }^{18}$ Once again, picking up on the key word in his partner's accusation, "remember," Eliot's speaker acknowledges, "I remember / Those are pearls that were his eyes" (I24-5), as if revisiting corpses on the battlefield via Shakespeare's The Tempest. He uses the present tense, as if he has just drifted off to that space of death and remembrance, while the allusion to Ariel's song for the second time in the poem evokes yet another drowned body, in this case Ferdinand's supposed "drowned father," the King of Naples, ${ }^{19}$ lying on the ocean floor much like Phlebas the Phoenician, his bones being picked at by the currents of the sea.

At this point, perhaps recognizing the faraway look in the eyes of her companion, the female speaker asks: "'Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?'" (I26). This explicitly aligns the male individual with the many characters in the poem who are "neither / Living nor dead" (39-40): that middle ground of tortured existence that I have associated

with the traumatic state and which was one of the most common analogues for the condition of the shell-shocked veteran. As Wyatt Bonikowski notes in his book on shell shock, the soldier-victim "was not dead, but he was not quite alive either since he seemed to be inhabited by some alien force encountered at war and brought home with him ... it is as if these men are the living dead, as if somehow death and not life animates them." ${ }^{20}$ Like those whom "death had undone" (63), Eliot's figure has been "undone" psychologically by his traumatic experience and spends his days like the crowds of wounded shades flowing over London Bridge in the "Unreal City" (60). In "A Game of Chess," Eliot is domesticating trauma, showing the reader what the poem's earlier images of mass trauma look like distilled to the personal and private, as a clash between two individuals who are vying for the primacy of their respective victimhoods. Just such a struggle occurred in Eliot's own tortured first marriage to Vivien Haigh-Wood. In one of her letters that begins by referencing her husband's 1921 breakdown, Vivien states with some exasperation, "I have not nearly finished my own nervous breakdown yet." ${ }^{21}$ The curious phrasing in "A Game of Chess" of death having "undone" these people suggests not that they have died like Dante's condemned shades, but that their encounters with death around them (as on the battlefield) have unraveled their psyches to the point that they might as well be ghosts wandering the city.

The fair answer, then, to the question of whether he is "alive, or not" is "neither." And the query about whether his head contains "nothing" is particularly painful given the previous evidence suggesting that part of the problem is that there are too many horrible memories rattling around in his mind, including appalling recollections of decomposing corpses, which he has now mentioned twice. But instead of going to that battlefield well for yet a third time, the speaker's disposition takes a manic turn as he quotes, or more likely sings, lines from the 1912 ragtime tune "that Shakespeherian Rag" (128). Here we have a speaker who has closed down emotionally as a result of the pain of the previous unsuccessful attempts at communication. From this point onward, the husband will offer no more revelations, and the exchange winds down with one final set of self-absorbed questions from the wife about how to fill up the time in her day and a set of abrupt, unexciting proposals by the husband delivered in a monotone.

This exchange is much more fractured and difficult to follow than the subsequent straightforward narrative accounting of the overhead conversation in the pub. Unlike that final discussion that is unfolded in a long, single, coherent stanza, the repartee between husband and wife starts and stops haltingly in broken-off lines and stanzas. Filled with fatuous questions of the sort a child might ask, and seemingly nonsensical answers that

provide little relief to the increasingly tense debate, the set piece serves to demonstrate Booth's contention that "the dislocations of war often figure centrally in modernist form, even when war itself seems peripheral to modernist content" (4). In fact, in the case of Eliot's treatment in The Waste Land of the traumatic consequences of combat experience, I see a poem that is attempting to drag the various ruptures caused by the Great War from the edges of "modernist content" right into its center via the trope of trauma, even though most portrayals of Eliot tend to emphasize his reticence about the war. ${ }^{22}$

While Cole emphasizes the formalization of violence in modernist literature, my reading suggests Eliot is interrogating suffering, which positions The Waste Land in a different light. Due to the obfuscation of initial wounding events in the poem and the position of characters seemingly stuck in posttraumatic paralysis, Eliot has backed himself into a corner regarding the question of recovery, even though the various myths overlaid onto the poem seem to hold out redemption as a possibility. Eliot invokes the Grail legend in his "Notes" to The Waste Land, thus gesturing to the manner in which a supernatural outside source may restore a wounded king and his ravaged land, and the gathering thunder clouds towards the end of the poem suggest an imminent cleansing rain that will help "set my lands in order" (425). Yet recovering from trauma entails bringing the origins of an injury into the light of the present day where they can be identified, acknowledged, and processed. Because The Waste Land so insistently conceals the roots of trauma, its characters are left trapped in their suffering without knowing how to turn to the healing aspects of the past. The poem as such foregrounds the effects of violence upon human beings who seem to possess a hopeless future. Where Cole uncovers solutions to the challenges of violence via the mechanism of aesthetic triumph that provides "imaginative release," I see mostly dead ends. This reorientation is especially important because it repositions Eliot from a writer who sees salvation in art to one looking for answers beyond that arena; ultimately, it offers one possible explanation for Eliot's turn in the I920s toward education, religion, and community as potential solutions to some of the profound moral problems of his age.

# NOTES 

I T. S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays (1969; London: Faber and Faber, 1985). Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.

2 A notable exception in part II of the poem is Tereus, the legendary king of Athens who brutally raped and cut out the tongue of his wife's sister, Philomel.
3 Sarah Cole, At the Violet Hour: Modernism and Violence in England and Ireland (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 5. Further references to this

text will be cited parenthetically. Peter Sheehan's Modernism and the Aesthetics of Violence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013) also examines the modernism-violence nexus, but he does not engage Cole's arguments.
4 Dori Laub, "Bearing Witness or the Vicissitudes of Listening," Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Literature, Psychoanalysis, and History, ed. Shoshana Felman and Dori Laub (New York: Routledge, 1992), 57. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.
5 Dominick LaCapra, Writing History, Writing Trauma (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), 47. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.
6 Jay Winter, Sites of Memory, Sites of Mourning (1996; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 5.
7 Jahan Ramazani, Poetry of Mourning: The Modern Elegy from Hardy to Heaney (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 26.
8 Peter M. Sacks, The English Elegy: Studies in the Genre from Spenser to Yeats (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985), 2. Like Ramazani and others, Sacks sees The Waste Land functioning as a site where Verdenal's death is being mourned (26I). Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.
9 See, for example, Colleen Lamos's "The Love Song of T. S. Eliot: Elegiac Homoeroticism in the Early Poetry," Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot, ed. Nancy Gish and Cassandra Laity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), which sees the elegiac mode in Eliot's work as a means for him "simultaneously to affirm and to repudiate same-sex affection" (24). Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar read the poem "as a dirge for Verdenal" that "becomes a kind of fragmented and surrealistic pastoral elegy" in No Man's Land: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century, vol. 2: Sexchanges (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989), 3 I I; David Spurr explores the poem's struggle to mourn successfully due to a postmodern awareness of the speaking subject's continual dismantling even when continuing to seek out the catharsis typically found in elegies in "The Waste Land: Mourning, Writing, Disappearance," Yeats Eliot Review 9 no. 4 (1988): 16I-4; and Gregory Jay examines the way in which The Waste Land engages in a dialogue with some of its notable elegiac forebears in T. S. Eliot and the Poetics of Literary History (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1983), 156-71.
Io John Milton, The Complete Works of John Milton, ed. John T. Shawcross (Garden City, New York: Anchor, 1971), 8.
II Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 6I, line 8I.
I2 Cole sees "Death by Water" as the "ideal of an enchanting transformation of violence and bodily harm to wonder and beauty" and thus a "paradigm for poetic consolation" (68), which is the exact opposite of how I view the lines functioning.
13 Vera Brittain, Testament of Youth (1933; New York: Penguin, 1994), 143.
14 Eliot, The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed., (London: Faber and Faber, 2009), 204, 205.

15 Allyson Booth, Postcards from the Trenches: Negotiating the Space between Modernism and the First World War (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), I I. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.

16 Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile, 13, line 46.
17 For an exhaustive study of trench slang names, see Peter Chasseaud, Rats Alley: Trench Names of the Western Front, 1914-1918 (Stonehouse, UK: Spellmount, 2006). "Alley" is slang for a British communication trench, while the ubiquity of rats at the front caused many a trench name to evoke that omnipresence, including Rat Lane, Rat Farm, Rat Pit, and many a Rats' Alley (Chasseaud 2006, 13, 118-19, 373).
18 Henri Barbusse, Under Fire, trans. Robin Buss (New York: Penguin, 2004), 305, 304 .
19 William Shakespeare, The Tempest, ed. Robert Langbaum (New York: Signet, 1987).

20 Wyatt Bonikowski, Shell Shock and the Modernist Imagination: The Death Drive in Post-World War I British Fiction (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2013), 2, 18 .

2I Vivien Eliot to Scofield Thayer, October 13, 1921, Letters, I, 592.
22 In "'Where are the Eagles and the Trumpets?': Imperial Decline and Eliot's Development," A Companion to T. S. Eliot, ed. David Chinitz (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), Vincent Sherry espouses this position when he notes that "the record the war leaves in Eliot's poetry of the late teens is not nearly so explicit a history as may be found in other civilian poets" (95).
