# I I 

EVE SORUM

## Psychology, Psychoanalysis, and New Subjectivities

From the opening stanza with its shifting pronouns, The Waste Land presents speaking voices that challenge the autonomy of the individual subject. Over the course of the past century, this challenge has spurred two conflicting critical stances: on the one hand, that The Waste Land provides a method to unify its many voices and subjects; on the other, that the poem records and even promotes the inevitable fragmentation of the modern subject. Early New Critical readings influentially championed the first perspective; in 1932 F. R. Leavis asserts that Eliot's note about Tiresias "provides the clue" to the poem's project to "focus an inclusive human consciousness," while in 1937 Cleanth Brooks argues that the poem functions as a "unified whole" emerging from a central "protagonist." ${ }^{1}$ A later line of critics disagreed, citing fragmentation rather than unity as the defining state of the modern subject and of the poem; we might look to Maud Ellmann, who claims that "the poem violates the very notion of a private self," or Michael Levenson, whose reading of the first line shows how "the boundaries of the self begin to waver." ${ }^{2}$ Either way, the debate makes clear that whether the poem is described as a triumph of a unified consciousness or as a "tragedy of unreconciled voices," ${ }^{3}$ The Waste Land is terrifying and exhilarating in part because it is simultaneously deeply atomizing and replete with voices urging connection. The variation in scholarly responses suggests that examining the issue of subjectivity and the role of psychology in The Waste Land means confronting contradictory critical impulses and interpretive pathways. In this essay I will argue that we see Eliot expressing a theory of subjectivity in the poem that, while reflecting several of Sigmund Freud's contemporaneous theories, ultimately places a far greater emphasis on the material world as central to determining the boundaries and the content of subjectivity. The polyphony in The Waste Land becomes connected, in my reading, to attempts to reach outside the individual subject - to engage in acts of empathy - even while acknowledging the painful and dangerous nature of such perspective shifting.

Published just two years after Freud's Beyond the Pleasure Principal (1920), The Waste Land was read by critics like Leavis as a manifestation of the importance of psychoanalytic interpretation, with Eliot's Tiresias as "the appropriate impersonation" of the modern figure in "an age of psychoanalysis." ${ }^{4}$ Yet Eliot's relationship to Freudian thought is complicated and often dismissive. In one of his 1922 "London Letters" to the Dial, for example, he remarks that the ideas coming out of Vienna are "a dubious and contentious branch of science." ${ }^{5}$ Thus, while an examination of Freud's concepts of "unpleasure" and the unyielding presence of the "repetition compulsion" ${ }^{6}$ is illuminating and even needed when discussing subjectivity in The Waste Land, more defining for Eliot were other circulating theories of the unconscious and of the boundaries of human subjectivity.

In claiming this, I follow Paul Stasi's recent argument that reading Eliot's dissertation on the philosopher F. H. Bradley alongside The Waste Land reveals how "Eliot constructs a theory of inter-subjectivity, which emphasizes the role of culture in the creation of subjects, objects, and the historical ground on which subjects meet." ${ }^{7}$ The link between Eliot's poetry and his research on Bradley, a British Idealist philosopher at Oxford, has been extensively explored by critics including William Skaff and Michael Levenson, among others, but it is worth quoting Eliot's claim, from a June 1919 letter to Lytton Strachey, that "Anything I have picked up about writing is due to having spent (as I once thought, wasted) a year absorbing the style of F. H. Bradley - the finest philosopher in English." ${ }^{8}$ Yet we cannot stop with Bradley's philosophy; we must go beyond Eliot's formulation of the unconscious in his dissertation and early essays and examine his own therapeutic experience with the Swiss psychologist Dr. Roger Vittoz. Eliot had read Vittoz's book on The Treatment of Neurasthenia by Means of Brain Control in 1921, just before going to Lausanne to be treated by the psychologist in person. While in Lausanne Eliot continued work on The Waste Land and produced, according to Lawrence Rainey's meticulous research on the various manuscripts, the handwritten fair copies of parts IV and V, as well as some other lines of poetry meant to link the different elements of part III more firmly together. ${ }^{9}$ The versions of subjectivity that emerge in The Waste Land present a fusion of a Bradley-inspired understanding of the porous boundaries of the subject and a Vittozian emphasis on the centrality of process - of repetition and conditioning - in order to create a functioning subject. We will see that rather than simply an outward manifestation of repressed trauma, the repetitions of the poem indicate attempts to reconstruct subjectivity in a world in flux.

Eliot articulates his own theory of the subject while discussing Bradley's argument from Appearance and Reality (1893) that reality is founded upon

"immediate experiences" ${ }^{10}$ - the perceptual events in which the boundaries between the self and the surrounding world are no longer visible. These experiences are then resolved, for Bradley, into a unified, unknowable whole called the "Absolute." ${ }^{11}$ While Eliot dismisses Bradley's idea of the Absolute as an imaginary resolution, ${ }^{12}$ he does take up enthusiastically the idea of immediate experience and, centrally, the ultimate relativity of the relationship between self and world: the existence of the subject depends on the object, and vice versa. Thus, Eliot writes, "reality as we may know it, the ultimate criterion which gives meaning to our judgments of existence, is so far as it appears at all, our experience, yet an experience which only to a certain extent - from a certain necessary but untenable point of view - is 'ours.' "13 These flickering borders between subject and object, subject and subject, mean that there is always a line of connection between seemingly alienated perspectives, for "[a]nother person, and in its degree another thing, is not for us simply an object; there is always, I believe, a felt continuity between the object and oneself" (Ibid., 8I). Examining this reading of Bradley thus presents an Eliot more concerned with the possibilities and even the inevitabilities of connection than we often realize, and reveals his vision of a fragmented but coherent modern subject. It also shows how subjectivity is necessarily defined through interactions with and perceptions of the material and interpersonal world. While The Waste Land presents a cosmos in which subjects are profoundly alienated from both themselves and from others, as well as one in which the idea of the coherent subject is fundamentally questioned, the poem simultaneously suggests that "subjects can reconnect through the construction of a common world built, in part, out of the 'unreal' objects of language and culture" (Stasi 43). All of the "objects of language and culture" provide the building blocks of the individual subject, even as they also reveal the composite and social nature of that subject. The route to this connection is through perception, as Eliot describes in his essay on "The Perfect Critic:" "Not only all knowledge, but all feeling, is in perception." ${ }^{14}$ By grounding knowledge and feeling in acts of perception, Eliot posits individual identity as not simply affected by external stimuli, but as composed by them - knowledge and feeling are "in perception" (my emphasis).

We can begin to see connections between the psychological and the material when examining the theories and, particularly, the therapeutic practices of Dr. Roger Vittoz. During Eliot's 1921 breakdown and while undergoing an unsuccessful rest treatment in Margate, Eliot appealed to Julian Huxley for information about Vittoz, whom Huxley had seen and who, according to Eliot's letter, was compelling because he was a "specialist in psychological troubles," and neither a "nerve" doctor nor, as he wrote in a later letter to

Sydney Waterlow, "a psychoanalyst." ${ }^{15}$ Vittoz's theory of the subject and of treatments of psychological disorders differs from Freud's, in part, because he argues that the will can and should be used to control the "unconscious" brain - the repository of what Vittoz terms "subjective" experience. ${ }^{16}$ Vittoz posits that the core of the subject is defined by the regulation of the relationship between the subconscious and the "conscious" brain - the latter of which engages in "objective" acts of judgment and reason (I-2). ${ }^{17}$ Psychological problems result, Vittoz argues, from an imbalance between these two parts of the brain. A return to what he calls "normal" brain control is when "every idea, impression or sensation is controlled by reason, judgment and will, that is to say, that these can be judged, modified, or set aside as required" (3). Vittoz's therapeutic practices, which Eliot underwent, involved working toward this control through a series of physical and mental repetitive exercises - exercises that ranged from focusing on basic physical actions (like bending one's limbs) to meditating on calming images and symbols. ${ }^{18}$ Vittoz roots psychological unity in both physical and mental practices while also emphasizing that repetition can be therapeutic, rather than a sign of repressed neuroses or the working through of a traumatic event.

Eliot's study of both Bradley's porous and conditional subject and Vittoz's practical vision of mental and physical unity suggests that the speaking voice/s of The Waste Land could be read in light of such constructive visions of a divided subjectivity. Of course, this focus begs the question of what or, rather, who might be the subject of The Waste Land. If, as Michael Levenson has argued, this poem can be seen as "a doctrinal act, the poem as a critical gesture," ${ }^{19}$ then probing of the limits of the subject involves questioning its own subject. The first part of the poem, "The Burial of the Dead," erupts with latent forces both poetically and thematically, and the need to bury these forces provides tension throughout this section. The cruelty of April is not simply in its imposed growth, but also in its "stirring" up of dormant memories, a stirring that unleashes that proliferation of the voices that define and haunt the poem. ${ }^{20}$ The boundaries of the subject are thereby called into question before we have even figured out who is speaking; by the fifth line - "Winter kept us warm" - the authoritative impersonal voice of the first lines claims a kind of community that is embodied grammatically, even if not corporeally, in the space of the poem. But this unexpected underground authority then engages in a shift that - despite its claim of an "us" - indicates that the "us" of the poem is multiple, rather than united; suddenly the "us" is in the realm of memories about the pre-war world of the "Hofgarten" (Io) and sledding in northern mountains. The second half of the stanza hints at a more historically and socially embedded set

of perspectives with its specifications of place ("the Starnbergersee" and "Hofgarten," 8, IO), of nationality ("Litauen, echt deutsch," I2), and even of individual identity ("Marie," I 5), but the shifting pronouns and the movements between past and present suggest that the subject of this poem is not so easily parsed. Indeed, the stanza ends with winter, bringing us from the promise of regeneration and growth of April, back to the stasis of that season of "forgetful snow" (6).

Yet here is where we have to begin to distinguish the difference between the pathological and the normal subject - the difference between a "felt continuity between the object and oneself" (Eliot Knowledge and Experience, 8I) that Eliot describes in his dissertation, and a subject for whom there is no continuity, only an onslaught of objects and others. This is the trauma voiced in the first lines of the second stanza:

What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow
Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man, You cannot say, or guess, for you know only A heap of broken images, where the sun beats, And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief, And the dry stone no sound of water. (19-24)

The terror of this scene for the "Son of man" is that he can connect nothing repeated later and more explicitly in "The Fire Sermon['s]" "I can connect / Nothing with nothing" (30I-2) - and can see no generative potential in this apocalyptic view, which seems to present only that which has been destroyed or made barren. This same scene reappears in the fifth part, "What the Thunder Said," and generates a voice there that, as we will later see, defines and delimits the nature of intersubjective interaction. At this earlier moment, however, the speaking voice points to various attempts to know and feel, and then to the failures of those attempts. Momentarily omniscient and distanced, the speaker tells the "Son of man,"
(Come in under the shadow of this red rock), And I will show you something different from either Your shadow at morning striding behind you Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you; I will show you fear in a handful of dust. (26-30)

With the evocation of both the following and the preceding shadows, the speaker suggests that at stake are the very means by which we acknowledge both identity and temporality. In one sense, we know when and where we are through these shadows - they are signifiers of our ability

to step outside of ourselves and, even if only distortedly and passingly, to get a glimpse of how we might appear. And the shadows also hint at those shades, those shadows of the dead that haunt the poem, from the first lines until the figure of the "third who walks always walks beside" (359) found in the final section. Yet this is a profoundly self-centered vision in this arid and empty world populated only by the I, the you, the shadows, and the "fear in a handful of dust" (30). The dust, like the shadows, already carries a double valence: on the one hand, it is the physical marker of the dead, who have gone back to the dust. On the other, it is suggestive of an utter absence of a consolatory, productive, or self-reflective element in nature an example of nature resisting its traditional role as an enabler of poetic meaning-making.

This self-centeredness is even more apparent in light of the textual history of the poem. The facsimile of The Waste Land manuscripts shows us that these first lines of this section ("Come in under the shadow of this red rock," 26) originate in an earlier poem, "The Death of Saint Narcissus," which was probably written in 1915. In this early poem, Eliot describes the life of a saint who goes into the desert to escape both his own male body and the teeming cities too full of "faces, convulsive thighs and knees." ${ }^{21}$ Out in this desert landscape Narcissus imagines that he has become first a tree, then a fish, and then a girl, losing his body in these hallucinations until he finally succumbs to an actual death by burning arrows. Instead of the "red rock" of The Waste Land, here the poet asks the reader to "Come under the shadow of this grey rock"22, and then reveals that we will see a shadow that does not resolve into the abstracted "fear in a handful of dust" (The Waste Land 30) we get in "The Burial of the Dead," but into the figure of Saint Narcissus: "I will show you his bloody cloth and limbs" (Facsimile, 95, line 6). The poem goes on to describe the saint as reaching a state of profound and almost unbearable self-awareness, for the movements of the air and his body create such sensitivity ("His eyes were aware of the pointed corners of his eyes," 95 , line 14) that he can no longer live among other men, becoming a "dancer before God" ( 95 , line 17). In this new role Saint Narcissus takes on the experiences of other life forms, first assuming the state of a tree, "twisting its branches among each other" ( 97 , line 22), then a fish "With slippery white belly held tight in his own fingers" ( 97 , line 25 ), and finally a young girl raped by a drunken old man, "Knowing at the end the taste of her own whiteness" ( 97 , line 30). Each of these assumed forms and knowledge are accompanied by a kind of violence that is perpetrated by someone who is both himself and an other (he feels drunken and old, for example, after "knowing" the rape of his own

body, 97 , lines 30-2). Saint Narcissus therefore returns to his own body and welcomes giving it in self-sacrifice:

Until the arrows came.
As he embraced them his white skin surrendered
itself to the redness of blood, and satisfied him. ( 97 , lines $36-8$ )
With this palimpsest of the first stanza from the "The Death of Saint Narcissus," we can connect The Waste Land shadows with a vision of a world where, behind the shadows, lurks the knowledge of the tortures produced by a self-immolating empathy. Echoing Freud's definition of narcissism as describing "the attitude of a person who treats his own body in the same way in which the body of a sexual object is ordinarily treated," ${ }^{23}$ the metamorphoses in the poem ostensibly bring the saint closer to God through a layered experience of simultaneous martyrdom and aggression. The poem, in fact, portrays a figure who seems to embody an absolute rescinding of the self in order to know the horror attendant on other forms of life - a rescinding of self that involves the complete adoption of another person's perspective, even when it is one that harms the self. There is a masochistic impulse in this empathetic stretching, therefore; self-sacrifice is the ultimate and the logical outcome of the saint's surrender to death. In this way, Saint Narcissus is figured as the simultaneously beautiful and terrifying example of one whose yearning to take on another perspective is, at the same time, the desire for self-destruction. The act of perspective-taking threatens to lead to the end of the self and points to the possible dangers to the individual subject who tries to occupy other experiences. The boundaries of the subject are thus not simply porous, but also liable to distortions that may destroy the self.

Indeed, even in that final stanza, in which Saint Narcissus seems to have finally returned to his own body, a further metamorphosis occurs - this one on the textual level. We see Saint Narcissus pierced by arrows, but this image is drawn from the life of a different saint, St. Sebastian, about whom Eliot had written an earlier poem, "The Love Song of St. Sebastian," in 1914. This poem had emerged from Eliot's 191 I trip to Italy, where he saw his favorite image of St. Sebastian, though his St. Sebastian poem does not include any description about the saint's life or death; it is only in the Saint Narcissus poem that we get the arrows and the martyred death. Thus not only does "The Death of Saint Narcissus" return us to the combined corporeal pleasures and dangers of assuming another perspective, but it also leads us into a series of textual shifts in subject: the St. Sebastian of the early poem is resurrected in the death of Saint Narcissus, who in turn reappears in the unmoored speaking voice of The Waste Land.

In this exploration of the "shadows" within The Waste Land, therefore, we begin to understand the shadows cast by its textual history - a kind of textual unconscious in the poem. Indeed, the question seems not whether we can locate the materials of the unconscious in The Waste Land, but whether there is anything but those materials in the poem. Skaff makes the most thorough case for how to read Eliot's own layered understanding of the unconscious, arguing that it emerges from his studies in philosophy, scientific psychology, and anthropology at Harvard. From this blend of sources, though with particular reference to Bradley, Eliot developed a theory of the unconscious as involving metaphysical, psychological, and physiological levels that blend and create a "composite unconscious" (Skaff, 47). Eliot's metaphysical consciousness, which is connected to the immediate experience that operates as Bradley's foundational structure, is communal and (because it changes over time) historical, providing the closest approximation to an ideal, "objective" reality and understanding because it involves the "integration of all those points of view that provide us with our world" (Skaff, 60). The physiological basis of the unconscious emerges in the workings of the body and those processes - a pumping heart, breathing lungs - that are continuously occurring without our awareness. The psychological consists of all of those experiences and perceptions contained in our memory and those impulses that may be unrecognized but that still influence our actions and belief. The psychological unconscious is the one most closely linked to Freud's version of the unconscious: that repository of memories, experiences, hopes, and fears that percolate within and influence our actions and personality, even though we may be unaware of them. If, then, Freud's focus was on the unconscious of the individual, while Carl Gustav Jung stressed the collective unconscious, Eliot merged the individual and the collective into one (Skaff, 47). According to Skaff, therefore, Eliot's unconscious is not only composite because of the three layers but also because he views the psychological as always participating in and emerging from collective memory.

This composite nature of the poetic unconscious in The Waste Land develops from those very first lines of the poem with the voices, the multiple perspectives, and the underlying personal and historical memories. While bodies certainly are present in the poem, often in ways that remind us of their distressing half-lives (recall that corpse of Phlebas the Phoenician, floating while "A current under sea / Picked his bones in whispers," 3 I 5-16), it is the body of the poem itself that most evocatively manifests the forces of a collective unconscious, with shifting poetic voices that point to the cumulative and changing nature of both personal and general experience. Both Eliot's "Notes" - however much of an afterthought they may have been for the poem - and the myriad references, quotations, and gestures point

to the historical and cultural memories that infuse the conscious life of the poem and emerge in sometimes disturbing, sometime exhilarating, ways. For example, the final line of "The Burial of the Dead" - "'You! Hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, - mon frère!'" (76) - enacts both an intersubjective and an intertextual movement. When the speaker suddenly addresses the reader, the poem not only showcases its own porous boundaries between its voice and the voice of dead poets, but also exposes the fissures between its present moment of reading and various past moments of composition.

In moments of intertextuality like this one - as well as in the images that have haunted the whole of "The Burial of the Dead" - the question of repetition and its relationship to the composite unconscious emerge. The final stanza of "The Burial of the Dead" foregrounds the terrifying potential and the structuring nature of the repetitive impulse. The scene of this "Unreal City" (60) is defined by, first of all, the return of the dead - the form of repetition that this poem explores in its opening lines and then manifests on a grand scale in this stanza: "A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many / I had not thought death had undone so many" (62-3). The rhythmic repetition of phrases ("so many ... so many") points to the exhaustion engendered by the repetitive act, an exhaustion that resolves to the horror of returning to a past moment of trauma - an incident that is strong enough, to use Freud's explanation, to breach the "shield against stimula" that usually protects the mind from the influx of signals from the external world (Freud $B P P, 70$ ). In this scene, the traumatic experience involves the return of the supposedly buried dead, and is triggered, in this case, by the sight of a figure from an ancient battle ("'Stetson!," 69) in the ghostly crowd who "flowed over London Bridge" (62). In the case of Stetson, not only does he signify the return of the battle dead, but he also leads the speaker into a frenzy of anxiety about the potential unearthing and generation of more dead: "'That corpse you planted last year in your garden, / Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?'" (7I-2). While this grisly repetition manifests itself as unsought and unpleasurable, it also, as Freud explains, functions as a method of psychological ordering and gaining control: through repetition of "an unpleasurable experience," one can "achieve a far more solid mastery of the powerful impression than was possible through mere passive experience" ( $B P P, 74-5$ ). Indeed, we see in the reference to the battle at Mylae a connection between the dead of World War I and the ancient dead, while Eliot also gives us a literary framework when he directs us to John Webster's 1612 play The White Devil for his reference to the "Dog" (75) who might also unearth the corpse.

To suggest that we see some sort of connective, ordering, and extending version of subjectivity in the fragments of the first section does not

mean that we can conclude that this is the poem's final word on how to imagine the boundaries of the subject. In part II, in fact, Eliot explores further the pathology of the subject and the boundaries that remain in place and forestall any meaningful intersubjective connection or communication. The dynamics of the conversations we overhear in "A Game of Chess" are defined by the title: chess is both a form of interaction prescribed by the constraints of the formal, adversarial relationship of the chess game, and a game that involves trying to enter into the head of the opposing player, anticipating the opponent's moves in order to counteract them. The game presents a space of interaction in which strategy depends on imagining other perspectives. The text of what follows suggests that such strategic thinking is impossible in this relationship and that attempts to understand another point of view hinder, rather than facilitate connection. The strange and richly ornamented scene in which the woman sits, a kind of carved queen in a "Chair ... like a burnished throne" (77), provides the setting for a breakdown in communication between the thinking voice of the poem, and the nervous woman:
'My nerves are bad to-night. Yes, bad. Stay with me.
Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
I never know what you are thinking. Think.'
I think we are in rats' alley
Where the dead men lost their bones.
'What is that noise?' (I I I-I7)
The frantic voicing of the woman, who desires and asks for both outward and inward connection - though perhaps in a counterintuitive order, for speech comes before thought in this formulation - meets a thought, either unvoiced or unheard, that suggests the man's mind is occupied with things that verge on the unspeakable. Eliot reinforces this disconnect through the excisions he made for the published version, trimming away some of the responses to the woman's questions so that she (and we) have even less access into the man's mind. The dialogue goes so horribly awry here because the man's mind is with the lost dead of World War I: in the earlier drafts, he responds to her question of "What is the wind doing?" (Facsimile II, line 44) with "Carrying / Away the little light dead people" (13, 45-6), which is then changed in the published version to the decidedly more oblique "Nothing again nothing" (I20). The "little light dead" are transformed into words that present a loss of language rather than a loss of life. Along with the dead people, meaning-making and communication become casualties of the war.

At this point we might think that The Waste Land posits a post war apocalyptic social landscape in which intersubjective understanding is impossible. Yet we turn at the beginning of the next section, "The Fire Sermon," to a poetic I who, even as it predicts the end of song, returns through textual illusions to earlier moments of the Spenserian lyric, tracing a long continuum of verse. While the deathly "rattle of the bones" (186) and the blaring sounds of "horns and motors" (197) provide, on the one hand, a disillusioning backdrop to the attempted song, they also point to the historical and literary nature of this poetic unconscious. The sounds create a temporal tapestry on the Thames that connects to Freud's psychoanalytic framework in Beyond the Pleasure Principle describing the structure of perception and consciousness. There Freud presents the human subject - the conscious subject - as acted upon by the stimuli that are filtered and allowed through by the sense organs and that are necessarily a "random sampling of the external world" (68). This idea of the filtering subject, what Freud calls a "living vesicle with its cortical layer for the reception of stimuli" (68), resonates with Bradley's theory of a "finite centre," which, Eliot writes, "so far as I can pretend to understand it, is immediate experience," ${ }^{24}$ and is comparable, though not identical, to the idea of the soul. Yet the difference between Freud's living vesicle and Bradley's "finite centre" - a difference that helps explain why Bradley's version might ultimately make more sense in Eliot's framework - is that Freud's theory emphasizes the success of the "shield against stimuli from the external world," versus the absence of shield for the stimuli coming from within, thereby assigning more influence to the internal stimuli (BPP, 69). Eliot emphasizes in his analysis of Bradley, however, that the subject is the site at which, through interactions with the external world, the "real" world comes into being. ${ }^{25}$

In this reading, therefore, the palimpsests of lives and detritus that appear in the London scene are as constructive as they are symptomatic of the historical layering of the poetic subject and of the varying perspectives that emerge from one geographical place. Indeed, this may be why many critics read Tiresias as giving insight into the "subject" (in all meanings of the word!) of the poem. Tiresias is not simply important because he unifies the experiences of the modern subject, understanding both the male and female and embodying - like the "taxi throbbing" (217) - the mechanized nature of modern psychology, which is always subject to desires that seem both transactional and out of its control. Rather Tiresias presents a consciousness that, in its unique ability to understand multiple perspectives, reveals a "real" world coming into being. In this way, the version of subjectivity that we get through Tiresias involves a vision of the self as multivalenced

and polyphonous, having "foresuffered all" (243). Thus Rochelle Rives's description of Eliot's theory of emotion - "neither subjective nor personal" but "concentrated and amenable to order because of its role in uniting a cacophony of experiences" - applies as well to Eliot's theory of the subject. ${ }^{26}$ The subject acts as a filter and a focalizer of experiences, thereby creating a kind of unification, but only through collation, and not integration and reconciliation.

If we turn to the final section, "What the Thunder Said," we begin to see how a more productive result of perspective shifting may emerge from such experiences of disorientation. We revisit the scene of "red rock" and barren desert first presented in "The Burial of the Dead," this time enlarged into a world in the aftermath of social, political, and cultural cataclysms:

After the agony in stony places
The shouting and the crying
Prison and palace and reverberation
Of thunder of spring over distant mountains (324-8)
Into this apocalyptic world comes the voice of the thunder, presenting sounds that the speaker transforms into a Sanskrit-based moral and ethical structure: the Sanskrit "Datta," "Dayadhvam," "Damyata," which Eliot translates as "Give, sympathise, control" (note 40I). When thinking about the composite and interconnected subjects and the merging of the metaphysical and the psychological unconscious within Eliot's poem, the middle term, "Dayadhvam" (4I2), stands out, for it suggests that some ability to step outside the self is still necessary in order to make it through this waste land. In a note to that middle term, however, Eliot quotes from Bradley's Appearance and Reality: "my experience falls within my own circle, a circle closed on the outside ... the whole world for each is peculiar and private to that soul" (note 4II). This note seems to suggest the impossibility of intersubjective connections - of empathetic imagining - in this new world.

Of course, we know from Eliot himself that his endnotes have led "so many enquirers off on a wild goose chase," encouraging, as he wrote in a 1956 essay, "the wrong kind of interest among seekers of sources." ${ }^{27}$ In his study of Eliot, Stephen Spender cited his friend Richard Wollheim's claim that the note on Bradley was deliberately misleading about Bradley's position, because Bradley ultimately argued that "everything that occurs within what we think of as individual minds is really an aspect of a single comprehensive consciousness." ${ }^{28}$ Yet, such knowledge should make us consider how to read this quotation, not simply make us dismiss it out of

hand. For there does turn out to be a bit of a twist here, if not of the same order as the made-up Tarot cards and the Jessie Weston references. A number of years ago Michael Levenson reminded us that this note should not be taken as indicative of Eliot's own view of shifting perspectives because in his dissertation Eliot was positing a "new theory of meaning" in his response to Bradley's position, a theory in which the experience of the world "is the product of multiple perspectives." ${ }^{29}$ We can see this in Eliot's own words perhaps most clearly in an essay he wrote about Leibniz and Bradley (published in The Monist in 1916, the period during which he was finishing up his dissertation): "If we insist upon thinking of the soul as something wholly isolated, as merely a substance of states," he writes, "then it is hopeless to attempt to arrive at the conception of other souls." ${ }^{30}$ Eliot then goes on to say, "what we do know is that we are able to pass from one point of view to another, that we are compelled to do so, and that the different aspects more or less hang together" (Ibid., 207). "[C]ompelled to": this phrase resonates with our experience of those first lines of The Waste Land, for there is something both compulsive and coerced about the restless shifts in perspective. And yet I think that this sense of compulsion also points to Eliot's emphasis on the necessity of perspective-taking; it is only through these shifts that we might be able to find something that hangs together, some move outside of the solipsistic "I." Eliot's quotation of Bradley thereby points to the haunting possibility of such isolation, but also to the need to move beyond it.

This does not mean, however, that we can ignore the sense of loss and disruption that seems to be at the heart of these shifts in point of view - that self-alienation that art historian Wilhelm Worringer emphasized as central to the empathetic act. ${ }^{31}$ In fact it is, I think, through highlighting this loss that Eliot transforms the act of moving between subjective viewpoints from something that could be ethically dubious (the attempt to project yourself onto and into another perspective, thereby subsuming it and claiming it for your own) into one that is ethically subtle (the recognition of the violence done to both self and to the other with every perspective shift, even though we must inhabit other perspectives, as he puts it in the essay, in order to have "the conception of other souls"). ${ }^{32}$ In other words, the act of seeing through another's eyes is painful and disorienting because it involves a breaking down of boundaries between self and other. This boundary-breaking leaves one, like Eliot's Tiresias, "throbbing between two lives" (218) with a painful knowledge equivalent to "hav[ing] foresuffered all" (243). Yet it is only through such difficult acts of perspective-taking, as well as through the realization that one is always in the process of being composed and recomposed, that one can hope to inhabit the modern, post war world.

# NOTES 

I F. R. Leavis, "The Waste Land," reprinted in T. S. Eliot: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Hugh Kenner (1932; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 92; and Cleanth Brooks, "The Waste Land: A Critique of the Myth," Modern Poetry and the Tradition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939), I36, I39.
2 MaudEllmann, The Poetics of Impersonality(Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversity Press, 1987), 15; Michael Levenson, A Genealogy of Modernism: A Study of English Literary Doctrine 1908-1922 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984), I7I.
3 Matthew Hart, "Visible Poet: T. S. Eliot and Modernist Studies," American Literary History 19 no. I (2007): 184.
4 Leavis "The Waste Land," 92.
5 Quoted in William Skaff, The Philosophy of T. S. Eliot: From Skepticism to a Surrealist Poetic (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1986), 74. Further references to Skaff will be cited parenthetically. Many friends of Eliot were influenced by Freudian thought and even underwent analysis with Freud. There are only two possible oblique references to Freud in Eliot's letters up to 1922; both simply refer to Vienna. The first is in a 1921 letter to Mary Hutchinson, asking whether Alix and James Strachey's London apartment is free while they are off in Vienna (he may have been unaware, of course, of their reasons for visiting Vienna, which was to undergo analysis with Freud). Eliot to Mary Hutchinson, June 16, 1921, in T. S. Eliot, The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume I: 1898-1922, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, rev. ed., (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 566. The second is from the same year in which Eliot made the comment about Freud in his "London Letter" (1922); in this letter he writes to Scofield Thayer, the owner of the Dial, concluding with the vague "I trust you [are] gaining spiritual and physical benefit from Vienna," where Thayer was in analysis with Freud (Eliot to Scofield Thayer, January 20, 1922, Letters, I, 623).
6 Freud describes the repetition compulsion as one in which an unpleasurable action or event is repeated and, in its repetition, allows the subject an active control over the event (Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, ed. Todd Dufresne, trans. Gregory C. Richter (New York: Broadview, 2011), 74-5).
7 Paul Stasi, Modernism, Imperialism, and the Historical Sense (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 43. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically. We can also look at Louis Menand's claim that we must see Eliot's emphasis on the "public" nature of experience in relation to both his dissertation and to his article on "Leibniz's Monads and Bradley's Finite Centers" (1916). See Louis Menand, Discovering Modernism: T. S. Eliot and His Context, 2nd edition (1987; New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 48 .
8 Eliot to Lytton Strachey, June 1, 1919, Letters, I, 357.
9 Lawrence Rainey, Revisiting The Waste Land (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2005), 35 .
Io F. H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality: A Metaphysical Essay (New York: Macmillan \& Co, 1893), 223. Bradley also calls the "immediate experiences of the felt" the "this-mines," to emphasize the way in which immediate experience

first seems specific to the individual. This specificity is what his turn to the Absolute will try to avoid.
I I Ibid. 242. Bradley writes in his "Recapitulation" chapter of the books that the Absolute is a "whole superior to and embracing all incomplete forms of life," and is thus "perfect" (242).
I2 See Levenson, 180-1, for a clear discussion of Eliot's response to Bradley's position.
I3 Eliot, Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley (London: Faber and Faber, 1964), 32. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.
I4 Eliot, Selected Prose of T. S. Eliot, ed. Frank Kermode (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975), 55 .
15 Eliot to Julian Huxley, October 26, 1921, Letters, I, 594; Eliot to Sydney Waterlow, December 19, 1921, 617.
16 Roger Vittoz, Treatment of Neurasthenia by Teaching of Brain Control, trans. H. B. Brooke (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 191 I), i. Further references to this text will be cited parenthetically.
17 The only recent article to discuss Vittoz and Eliot is Matthew K. Gold's "The Expert Hand and the Obedient Heart: Dr. Vittoz, T. S. Eliot, and the Therapeutic Possibilities of The Waste Land," Journal of Modern Literature 23 no. 3-4 (2000): 519-33, in which he argues that we can read The Waste Land as a "record of Eliot's sickness and his cure" (519) and that we need to think of this cure through the lens of Vittoz's theories. While I am not making this argument about the poem, Gold gives valuable details about both Eliot's reading of Vittoz's book and the practices and theories of the psychologist.
I8 Gold, 525 .
19 Levenson, 168.
20 Eliot, Collected Poems 1909-1962 (London: Faber and Faber, 1974), line 3. All quotations to The Waste Land refer to line numbers from this edition of the poem, except when noted that they are from the facsimile and manuscript text.
2 I Eliot, The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971), 95, line 19. Further references to quotations from this text will be cited parenthetically by both page and line number.
22 The Waste Land: A Facsimile, "The death of Saint Narcissus" 95, line i.
23 Freud, "On Narcissism: An Introduction," The Freud Reader, ed. Peter Gay (New York: W. W. Norton, 1989), 545.
24 Eliot, "Leibniz's Monads and Bradley's Finite Centres," Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley (1916; London: Faber and Faber, 1964), 205.

25 See Gold, 44-5.
26 Rochelle Rives, Modernist Impersonalities: Affect, Authority, and the Subject (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 13.
27 Eliot, "The Frontiers of Criticism," On Poetry and Poets (1956; New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy, 1957), 122, 121.
28 Quoted in Stephen Spender, T. S. Eliot (New York: The Viking Press, 1975), 25.

29 Levenson, 184 .
30 Eliot, 1964, "Leibniz's Monads and Bradley's Finite Centres," 206.
31 Worringer emphasized this counterintuitive aspect of aesthetic empathy in his treatise, arguing that "in empathising this will to activity into another object ... we are in the other object.... In this self-objectification lies a self-alienation." Wilhelm Worringer, Abstraction and Empathy: A Contribution to the Psychology of Style (1908; Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1997), 24.
32 Eliot, "Leibniz's Monads and Bradley's Finite Centres," 206.
