# I 2 

GABRIELLE MCINTIRE

## The Waste Land as Ecocritique

## I

Let us start with the pollution and the waste. These are defining features of the early twentieth-century landscapes and cityscapes that T. S. Eliot turns to through his oeuvre, with his poetry repeatedly registering ecosystems that are out of balance. From "The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes" ( 15 ) in "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" (1915) to "the smoke and fog of a December afternoon" (I) in "Portrait of a Lady" (1915), the "river" that "sweats / Oil and tar" (266-7) in The Waste Land (1922), the "vapour in the fetid air" (99) in Ash-Wednesday (1930), the recurring attention to "waste" in Choruses from the Rock (1934), and the "parched eviscerate soil" (67) of his last major poem, Little Gidding (1942), to name only a few examples among many, Eliot consistently shows sensitivities to fragile or degraded environments. In The Waste Land he simultaneously renders the postwar world as quasi-apocalyptic and replete with personal, political, spiritual, and cultural problems that threaten to unravel all meaning. In suggesting that ecological crises accompany these other problems of early twentieth-century modernity, Eliot pushes us to consider the analogies between compromised environmental exteriors and a complex range of similarly polluted interior states.

In reading The Waste Land we should take the title of the poem literally as well as figuratively. With Eliot's keen eye for surroundings and landscapes, he is both writing about a barren, postwar land that is marked by pollutants, vulnerable to smog, littered with trash, and, in a sense, dying, while he is inviting us to understand this bleak setting and ecology as offering symbolic and metaphorical commentary on our own wasted (and wasteful) existences. Lawrence Buell suggests that The Waste Land is "one of the first canonical works of modern Anglo-American literature to envision a dying society in the aftermath of world war," ${ }^{1}$ and one of the ways Eliot achieves this is by rendering a fallen post-pastoral world where nature is no longer available

or able to restore us. The Biblical desertscape near the start of the poem is filled with "stony rubbish" (20), and the post-Dickensian, post-Baudelairean London cityscape is marked by degradation and decay: the "brown fog of a winter dawn" (6I) hangs over pedestrian commuters as they cross London Bridge into the City center, and this smog lingers through the day to reappear later as "the brown fog of a winter noon" (208). ${ }^{2}$ The commuters themselves exhale "Sighs, short and infrequent" (64), as if perhaps trying to expunge despair as well as pollution. ${ }^{3}$ Indeed, like the wasted landscapes that surround them, the poem's denizens are unwell, diseased, barely alive, or even dead: from the line also borrowed from Dante, "I had not thought death had undone so many" (63), to Stetson's ghost (69), "rats' alley / Where the dead men lost their bones" (I 15 -16), the blunt question, "'Are you alive, or not?'" (127), talk of abortion, the undead Tiresias who haunts the poem, and Phlebas's drifting bones, we can see why Eliot's close friend and sometime editor, John Davy Hayward, once observed that the key "theme" of the poem is "death in life." ${ }^{4}$ Eliot writes toward the close of The Waste Land, "We who were living are now dying" (329).

The land is similarly under threat of death. In this case it is a double threat, involving both the inevitable annual destruction brought by winter - a seasonal cycle that may be linked to origins of ritual and religious practices which Eliot foregrounds in acknowledging his debt to Sir James Frazer's The Golden Bough in his "Notes on the Waste Land" [sic] - as well as the more irreversible damages left in the wake of human warfare and pollution. The poem, as such, unfolds in sites of crisis that are themselves in extremis. Place in this way becomes all at once a subject and object of scrutiny as Eliot offers us meditations on the very meaning of locale, spatiality, and topography, and the ways in which environments both permeate and reflect human existence.

In the first lines of part III, "The Fire Sermon," the speaker begins with a lament for a legendary pastoral past: "The nymphs are departed" is repeated twice ( 175 and 179). And although part of the riverscape is "broken" (173), and the rustle of the natural is lost to human senses - "The wind / Crosses the brown land, unheard" (174-5) - this first-person speaker still appeals to nature for solace, as if insisting that the healing powers associated with ancient bucolic, literary, and ritualistic traditions could still be active amidst a desolate modernity. Locating this pastoral turn in the very the heart of London, the speaker addresses the personified Thames with a repeated, gentle apostrophe: "Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song. // ... Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song, / Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long" (176, 183-4). Eliot borrows the refrain directly from Edmund Spenser's late sixteenth-century Prothalamion, where

Spenser explicitly writes of seeking "to ease my payne" by walking by the "shoare of silver streaming Themmes" (I0-II). ${ }^{5}$ In Eliot's context, the Thames appears for a brief moment as it once might have - as relatively pure and unlittered - although such cleanliness is reported only through negation:

The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers, Silk handkerchiefs, cardboard boxes, cigarette ends Or other testimony of summer nights. (177-9)

It is a surprise that the river is temporarily free of the signs of human detritus, and Eliot's portrait of the river remains marred by the garbage that is missing. The momentary condition of the Thames' relative purity also stands in contrast to the same river later in the poem, paradoxically in its location beyond the City center, that "sweats / Oil and tar" (266-7) and is filled with markers of trade, consumption, and deforestation: "The barges wash / Drifting logs/ Down Greenwich reach/ Past the Isle of Dogs" (273-6). Again, Eliot personifies the river, as if, like the human inhabitants of the waste land, it must labor - "sweat[]" - to excrete impurities. And when the apostrophic gesture to the natural so quickly fails, instead of solace we find coldness, death's remains, and mockery, as Eliot moves from Spenser to Andrew Marvell's "To His Coy Mistress" - a love poem filled with urgency and longing - with a bleak revision incorporating echoes from Ezekiel to suggest that even the elements are against us: "But at my back in a cold blast I hear / The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear" ( $185-6$ ).

This section of the poem, "The Fire Sermon," takes its title from one of the Buddha's sermons about abstaining from desire, and surely this includes desires that lead to overconsumption, excess waste, and pollution. After "The rattle of the bones" we read,

A rat crept softly through the vegetation
Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
While I was fishing in the dull canal
On a winter evening round behind the gashouse
Musing upon the king my brother's wreck (187-91)
This dirty, degraded rat is one of the many animals that appear in The Waste Land, captive to its (mostly) troubled settings. We find also a "cricket" (23), a "Dog" (74), a "nightingale" (I00), other rats (II5, 195; perhaps Eliot's favorite animal after the cat), "gulls" (313), "cicada" (353), a "hermit-thrush" (356), "bats" (379), a "cock" (391), a "spider" (407), and a "swallow" (428) - a diverse array of mostly undomesticated animals, each

of which carries intense or mythic significance for the human imagination. In his attention to this creaturely biodiversity that is, by necessity, linked to the polluted and waste-filled sites of the poem - the cityscape and the desertscape - Eliot is also, in part, registering that the wild is, in fact, not so wild any more. The wild is too intricately bound up with culture, symbol, and with environmental fallout to be really "free" any longer.

The environment of the London canal that Eliot depicts is as desolate as the end of traditions, shipwrecks, and the death of kings. With resonances of the Old Testament's symbolics of the spiritual and physiological nourishment provided by "loaves and fishes," Eliot offers another version of the Fisher King legend where the person fishing is evidently looking in the wrong place for nourishment, redemption, or healing of the land. Seeking sustenance in a place constructed for industrial and commercial transit, near to a "gashouse" - a site of manufacturing for modern petroleum fuel - will only lead the speaker to find polluted fare. And the canal itself is merely a tributary of "the natural," branching out from the River Thames, almost rhizomatic, but not organically so: the canal abuts the natural, coursing into and from the natural, but it is a place where human-made filth, disorder, sterility, and decay literally flow. As Richard Lehan argues, The Waste Land "suggests that as the city lost touch with the land, with the rhythms and the psychic nourishment of nature, a spiritual meaning was lost." ${ }^{6}$ Indeed, Eliot seemed well aware that cities have "ecosystems" too: urban spaces are not bubbles that are immune from climate, weather, air, water, or food pollution. Part of what the poem proposes is thus that physical and spiritual nourishment linked to the natural world is not guaranteed even though we depend on it for our very survival.

Whether he knew it or not, Eliot was writing a version of what we would now call ecopoetics, or ecocriticism. Ecocriticism delineates forms of critical, literary, artistic, or cultural engagements with the natural environments in which we live, breathe, and exist. Emerging as a distinct approach within the humanities over the last few decades, influenced by environmental studies and ecology, ecocriticism pays attention to the ways in which sensitivities and awarenesses of our environmental milieus make their way into aesthetic expression. One path-breaking ecocritic, Jonathan Bate, defines ecology as "a holistic science, concerned in the largest sense with the relationship between living beings and their environment.... From an early stage $\ldots$ the term served to denominate both a biological science and an environmental attitude." ${ }^{7}$ Literary ecocriticism is inspired by these investigative tools yoked to literary studies, involving, as Timothy Clark suggests, " $a$ study of the relationship between literature and the physical environment,

usually considered from out of the current global environmental crisis and its revisionist challenge to modes of thought and practice." ${ }^{8}$ In The Waste Land, worries about fragile and deteriorating ecologies are embedded in its mythos and preoccupations, with its attention to polluted states working in addition - as a supplement - to Eliot's other, more explicit anxieties about the state of a postwar, ruined world where so much about human experience has become "Unreal" $(60,207,376)$.

The Waste Land depicts a culture and a society in which we are no longer able even to think "the natural" as undefiled. Eliot, in this sense, seems already aware of the terrifying breaches that a "post-natural" world signifies between "nature" and "the human," where "nature" is profoundly unbalanced by the effects of the human on a global scale even as we spectacularly fail to bear adequate witness to the massiveness and irreversibility of these changes. The Waste Land, in other words, comments on the cultural, personal, and ecological consequences of modern industrialization that we feel increasingly today. Nature in his poetry, just as the human, is ill. In "Rhapsody on a Windy Night" Eliot personifies another figure of nature, this time by signaling that even the moon "her"-self is (sexually) diseased and amnesiac: "The moon has lost her memory. / A washed-out smallpox cracks her face" (55-6).

# II 

Going back to some of Eliot's earliest poems, unpublished during his lifetime and written shortly after he began his master's degree at Harvard in 1909, we already find fascinations with urban pollution and refuse. In "First Caprice in North Cambridge" Eliot writes of "The yellow evening flung against the panes / Of dirty windows" (2-3), while "a crowd of tattered sparrows / Delve in the gutter with sordid patience" (8-9). ${ }^{9}$ In "Second Caprice in North Cambridge" he delineates a certain "charm" in "The helpless fields that lie / Sinister, sterile and blind - / Entreat the eye and rack the mind, / Demand your pity...// the débris of a city" (I-8). In his published work, as early as "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" (1915), Eliot renders the city air as a cat-like smog that is at once pet-like, domesticated, sexualized, and repulsive:

The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes, The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes, Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening, Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains, Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys (15-19)

The "yellow fog" and "yellow smoke" each "rubs" and "licks," touching "the corners of the evening," as if putting "its tongue" into a fragment of time itself - a reading we should be open to since immediately after Eliot completes his descriptions of the "yellow smoke" he begins a lengthy protest against the lack of time that echoes Ecclesiastes: "There will be time, there will be time / To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet; / There will be time to murder and create...." (26-8). As with The Waste Land, internal psychic environments and the external cityscape are, again, crucially analogous. The "streets" themselves have "insidious intent" (9), while the human figures in "Prufrock" are caught in a cityscape replete with desperation, sordidity, and destitution, and fail in their efforts at intimacy and (be)longing, unable to communicate: "'That is not what I meant at all./ That is not it, at all'" (97-8).
"Portrait of a Lady," first published just a few months after "Prufrock," similarly begins by setting the scene atmospherically in smoke-filled air: "Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon" (I). Eliot is still paying close attention to the very air of the city and its diminished quality, an air that marks a fluid exchange between an uncannily porous and proximate interior and exterior - between self and what is Other. Eliot's speakers must repeatedly take in the pollution around them, though how they metabolize it is left in question and we can only surmise that the results are not healthful. In the last verse paragraph of "Portrait of a Lady" we find another scene of smoky outside air in which the speaker anticipates a failed romantic connection, likely with Emily Hale, with whom Eliot maintained a strong, quasi-romantic connection until his second marriage:
and what if she should die some afternoon,
Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
With the smoke coming down above the housetops (II4-17). ${ }^{10}$
The "smoke" here is descending, not ascending, as if Eliot is suggesting that polluted air does not simply go away, disappear, or evaporate, but that its pernicious effects recirculate, coming "down" again to linger and pervade the places that we live.
"Preludes," the next poem in the Prufrock volume, describes a "winter evening" by way of smoke and discarded garbage:

The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
And now a gusty shower wraps
The grimy scraps
Of withered leaves about your feet
And newspapers from vacant lots (4-8)

In the first line here we are reminded of the question in "Prufrock," "Then how should I begin / To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?" (59-60), as if the modes by which we internally process time also produce waste: "burnt-out ends" and "butt-ends." The natural "leaves" (albeit from the cultivated trees of urban planning), are "withered" and appear in "grimy scraps" - filthy, torn, and fragmented, as if beaten by more than the weather. While William Wordsworth had famously insisted on a correspondence between the inner soul and the outer world in terms of beauty and sublimity more than 100 years before Eliot was writing, Eliot's poetry repeatedly follows the same formula of correspondence between inner and outer, but finds both interiority and exteriority fallen and vulnerable to wasting away. In "Preludes" Eliot writes further of the resonances between the degraded external environment - whether natural or otherwise - and the polluted "soul": "You dozed, and watched the night revealing / The thousand sordid images / Of which your soul was constituted" (26-8).

# III 

We also need to look carefully at desertscapes in The Waste Land since through Eliot's oeuvre he pays astute attention to two primary ecosystems in crisis: the desert and the city. ${ }^{11}$ As he will write in his later verse-drama, Choruses from the Rock (1934), the desert is not "remote," not far away, but here, within one's own corporeal frame as it finds itself caught within the transit networks of the city's infrastructure:

The desert is not remote in southern tropics, The desert is not only around the corner, The desert is squeezed in the tube-train next to you, The desert is in the heart of your brother. (70-3)

The desert, that is, exists as both place and idea, lodged in the very "heart" of one's "brother," whom, we recall, Eliot indicates in the closing line of "The Burial of the Dead" in The Waste Land is our very likeness: "'You! hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, - mon frère!'" (76).

Thus, as with Eliot's attention to the ecological settings of his speakers elsewhere, his external landscapes metaphorically and symbolically function as versions of Eliot's "objective correlative," offering sometimes nearly mimetic counterparts to personal interior states. In his 1920 essay, "Hamlet and His Problems," Eliot argues that "The only way of expressing emotion in the form of art is by finding an 'objective correlative'; in other words, a set of objects, a situation, a chain of events which shall be the formula of that particular emotion; such that when the external facts, which must terminate in sensory experience, are given, the emotion is immediately evoked." ${ }^{12}$

As the contemporary ecocritical writer, Barry Lopez, proposes, we are in a constant process of dialogue and exchange between our inner and outer worlds: our interior landscapes are a "projection within a person of a part of the exterior landscape," and our very way of thinking is "influenced by ... the intricate history of one's life in the land, even a life in the city, where wind, the chirp of birds, the line of a falling leaf, are known.... The interior landscape responds to the character and subtlety of an exterior landscape; the shape of the individual mind is affected by land as it is by genes." ${ }^{13}$ Ancient pastoral traditions posit much the same idea. As Terry Gifford points out, "real transferable learning about inner nature [can come] from dealing with and observing outer nature." ${ }^{14}$ Sigmund Freud in Civilization and Its Discontents proposes something similar when he briefly suggests a radical coextensiveness with the urban geography of Rome and the human psyche. For Freud, the mind is like a palimpsest that always contains traces of indelible memories, experiences, and ruins: as in the "Eternal City," where layers upon layers of architecture exist, in our psyches "nothing that has once come into existence will have passed away and all the earlier phases of development continue to exist alongside the latest one." ${ }^{15}$

In The Waste Land, Eliot's desert is a place of brokenness and trial, and it appears first through that question posed near the beginning of the poem that I mention above: "What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow / Out of this stony rubbish?" (19-20). The speaker is echoing here, intratextually already, the enigmatic statement of the poem's first lines where "April" is "stirring / Dull roots with spring rain" (3-4). Within the space of about a sonnet length, then, instead of "roots" that promise the regenerative new growth of springtime, these roots pull at one from garbage in a desiccated land. As elsewhere in the poem, there is no speakable or even guessable answer to questions posed, and this desert offers not solace to the "Son of man" (20), but overbearing natural intensities alongside aesthetic and semantic disintegration - "A heap of broken images" (22). This wasted land of sweltering heat is a place where one might be tested, physically and psychologically, to the limits of one's strength. In fact, in his "Notes" to these lines that he includes at the end of the poem Eliot directs us to verses from Ezekiel and Ecclesiastes, establishing explicit resonances with Old Testament terrains of deserts, temptations, droughts, and scourges. Eliot has thus already displaced us temporally and geographically from scenes and memories in The Waste Land's first lines that take place amid European high culture (sledding in the mountains; visiting Munich's Hofgarten) to an ancient Biblical time and setting, allowing each terrain and time to resonate and echo. In the desert, an Other lyric "I" invites his interlocutor to share the cooler shadows of the shelter of what seems like the welcome solidity

of "rock" - "(Come in under the shadow of this red rock)" (26) - but the possibility of solace is only momentary. Instead of any lasting comfort he will be shown "fear in a handful of dust" (30); he will be confronted with the terrifying reality of mortality, which Eliot figures as akin to the dust of the desert. Ashes to ashes, dust to dust.

At both the literal and figurative levels, the environments of The Waste Land desperately need water: after the pleasant "shower of rain" (9) from "over the Starnbergersee" (8) near its opening, most of the remainder of the poem is dominated by physical and spiritual dryness. In part V, "What the Thunder Said," one speaker falls into a repetitive and almost mad-sounding lament about this most basic lack and need, framing the desire for water with a series of anaphoric, subjunctive "If[s]," bound by rock and desert:

If there were water we should stop and drink ...
If there were only water amongst the rock ...

If there were water
And no rock ...
If there were the sound of water only (335-52)
Just as various speakers long for what seems to be unattainable intimacy and connection, the inhabitants of the waste land desperately crave the fundamentals of survival from a natural world that repeatedly fails them. Here, as elsewhere, Eliot may have been anticipating one of the great symptoms of the environmental crisis of our time where the current and projected scarcity of fresh water is heralded by many as the single most important global environmental threat. He writes, after all, of "voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells" (384).

# IV 

One of today's leading ecocritics, Greg Garrard, has proposed a rough typology for how we render the natural world through art and literature, structuring his book, Ecocriticism (2004), on sections devoted to recurring topoi for how human beings imagine the natural world, ranging through topics such as the wilderness and the sublime, to apocalyptic collapse, animality, and modes of human dwelling. One of the central tropes Garrard outlines is that of "the wilderness," a concept he traces back to "the very earliest documents of Western Eurasian civilization, such as The Epic of Gilgamesh," which "depict wilderness as a threat, and by the time the Judaic scriptures were written it is viewed with ambivalence at best. After the ejection from Eden, the wilderness is the place of exile ... associated

with Satan." ${ }^{16}$ The wilderness is also, he notes, a place to escape persecution and to overcome temptation: the "early Christian hermits went to the deserts" (6I). Eliot includes many of Garrard's typologies in The Waste Land by foregrounding crises related to the wilderness, apocalypse, and animality. Interestingly, although the poem's settings are primarily ones of topographical and environmental extremes (the polluted cityscape and the desert), we do find relief in a few remaining vestiges of the pastoral: places either sheltered from the city's dysfunctions, haste, and noise, or beyond the barrenness of the desert - in riverscapes, the lusher wildernesses of the "jungle" (398) near "Himavant" (397), or in briefly evoked gardenscapes. ${ }^{17}$ Even though idyllic escape is rare in The Waste Land, in a few charged moments glimmers of redemptive potential offer respite from the poem's existential bleakness. In each case, the almost epiphanic breakthroughs to another order of things occur within ecosystems at a remove from urban pollution and the trials of the desert. I would like to focus on two of these instances: the "hyacinth garden" (35-42) from the poem's first section, and the forest "Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees," (356) from the final section.

Indeed, in the "hyacinth garden" the speaker comes close to a sexual-romantic nirvana after recounting a memory of a gift of hyacinths to a beloved figure, finding himself in a blinding and silent state that briefly transcends the poem's paralyzing dialectic of "death in life" to reach a place beyond this dualism: "I was neither / Living nor dead" (39-40). But, as elsewhere in Eliot's poetry, this illumination is quickly followed by collapse and bathos: the verse paragraph concludes with Richard Wagner's "Oed' und leer das Meer" ("Desolate and empty the sea") from his tragic opera, Tristan und Isolde, signifying that Isolde's long-awaited ship is not appearing on the horizon. Meanwhile, the hyacinth is, of course, an early spring flower - one of the first - a flower that lets us know that springtime has definitively arrived. Even though we also hear echoes of Apollo's accidental killing of his beloved Hyacinthus here, the passionate gift of these flowers offers a welcome contrast to the city's walking dead and buried corpses that might "sprout" (72), intimating at least some growth and regeneration. But we see at once that we can register this scene only as a falling or failing bucolic that parallels the already fallen city as well as the "cruel[ty]" of April's "lilacs" that emerge from "the dead land." As Lyndall Gordon writes, "This might-have-been has no place in the waste of the present, where there is no longer a fertile love with the power to transform." ${ }^{18}$

Another moment of temporary respite from the trials of the poem occurs in the remembrance of the hermit-thrush's song. The speaker here, still longing for water, conjures the tranquility of "Where the hermit-thrush sings in

the pine trees" (356) as a signifier of refuge. In Eliot's "Notes" he explains that he had heard this bird in "Quebec Province," and he directs the reader to the well-known birdwatcher's companion guide, Chapman's Handbook of Birds of Eastern North America, which he quotes at some length. The hermit-thrush, Chapman writes, "'is most at home in secluded woodland and thickety retreats.... Its notes are not remarkable for variety or volume, but in purity and sweetness of tone and exquisite modulation they are unequalled.' " Eliot adds, "'Its water-dripping song' is justly celebrated" (note 357). That Eliot refers to Chapman - one of the pioneers of early twentieth-century ornithology - indicates at least a sophisticated amateur's interest in birdwatching, and his stress on the hermit-thrush's preferred habitats as "retreats" further underscores the interests and desires the poem expresses for places of respite and peace that would both be sheltered from the chaos of modernity and could provide shelter.

Indeed, in the concluding chapter of Eliot's book of criticism, The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism, published just over ten years after The Waste Land appeared, he asks a poignant question that might help to illuminate the recurring longings for places or symbols of natural purity that we find nestled in the poem:

Why, for all of us, out of all that we have heard, seen, felt, in a lifetime, do certain images recur, charged with emotion, rather than others? The song of one bird, the leap of one fish, at a particular place and time, the scent of one flower, an old woman on a German mountain path, six ruffians seen through an open window playing cards at night at a small French railway junction where there was a water-mill: such memories may have symbolic value, but of what we cannot tell, for they come to represent the depths of feeling into which we cannot peer. ${ }^{19}$

All of the memories Eliot mentions here are from the perspective of an outside: either in a landscape, or on its boundary. And the "one bird" about which he writes may just refer to the hermit-thrush. Richard Caddel suggests that in Ezra Pound's poetry, right through The Cantos, "we're being made to look at and listen to real birds ... in their surroundings. Throughout these Cantos there is observed nature in one form or another: clouds, light, insects, grass, plants, and so on. We can even note the natural climate." ${ }^{20}$ By contrast, in The Waste Land Eliot gives us animals, birds, and "nature" as always inextricably bound to culture, myth, and meaning-making: his nightingale sings like Ovid's bird; his dry desert is the wasted locus of the modern psyche in echo of the Old Testament desert of temptation which in turn calls up an ecological system that is out of balance; even his crickets are Biblical. An exception to this binding of culture with nature, though, seems

to be the "one bird," which feels more like a signifier of pure (and purifying) experience than a metonym, metaphor, or symbol that would lead us somewhere else. With the hermit-thrush Eliot wants us to hear the real thing, even if only spectacularly far away in a remote and northern woodland and remembered as a fragment of nostalgia.

# V 

Eliot's poetic renditions of ecological awareness are not new, of course, and there have been several excellent books on the concerns that earlier poets of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries - especially William Wordsworth - expressed about early signs of pollution and the loss of rural lands to urban development and industrialization. ${ }^{21}$ Jonathan Bate points to John Ruskin's critique of 1871, where Ruskin borrows from John Stuart Mill to insist that "The first three [principles of political economy] ... are Pure Air, Water, and Earth." ${ }^{22}$ Ruskin, Bate shows, "perceived the relationship between deforestation and drought" with a remarkable "prescience," while he railed against the polluted state of English rivers as being akin to the "common sewer." Ruskin even complains that the rain itself "falls dirty." ${ }^{23}$ As Raymond Williams argues, literary laments about a lost pastoral age have often wished to identify a precise time period for this disappearance; as he shows, though, pinpointing any dateable loss can take us as far back as Eden. ${ }^{24}$ Still, by the early twentieth century the reality of overcrowded cities and persistent urban and industrial pollution had become inescapable facts of life, yet very little attention has been paid so far to modernist engagements with ecological questions. As for the twenty-first century, Richard Caddel observes that we now live in "an age when nature can no longer be seen as infinite and eternal," and "when we can no longer afford to think of nature without thinking of ecology." ${ }^{25}$

I do not think that Eliot would disagree with Wordsworth's claims in his 1798 poem, "Tintern Abbey," that we are always in dialogue with our surroundings, being "Of eye and ear, both what they half-create, / And what perceive" ( $107-8$ ). ${ }^{26}$ The difference is that for Eliot, nature, when it appears, exists already in a kind of postlapsarian second fall. Like Wordsworth he may still be able
to recognise
In nature and the language of the sense, The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse, The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul Of all my moral being. (108-12)

But moments such as the (pained) reveries in the hyacinth garden, the song of the hermit-thrush, and appeals to "Sweet Thames" are fleeting, scarce, and insufficient to the task of redeeming the wasted land and its suffering. Instead, The Waste Land registers an economy of lack where we still desperately need the natural, but where the natural is precariously circumscribed, compromised, and tragically unavailable for more than the briefest of moments.

Near the end of The Waste Land Eliot stages a nightmarish vision in which our land and cities have reached the point of apocalyptic collapse:

Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal (373-6)
The major centers of culture that Eliot names are as broken and "Falling" as the inhabitants of the waste land (we remember, for instance, "The broken finger nails of dirty hands," 303, and the nursery-rhyme chant, "London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down," 426). Seen "over the mountains" - as if through a panoptic lens that takes into account the surrounding vistas and not just the isolated cities - these cities are, once again, rendered as "Unreal" (376), as if The Waste Land's settings and environments register an all-too-real unreality that has exceeded our abilities to make sense of it. Yet the tone of these lines that witness apocalypse sounds almost indifferent and resigned - as does Eliot's own voice when he reads the poem aloud ${ }^{27}$ - as if the consciousness that observes such environmental, social, and spiritual calamities has internalized the world-as-chaos and can now only project a commensurate barrenness onto the world.

I begin to wonder if we might consider The Waste Land as, at least in part, an eco-poem that is already sounding the warning about environmental disaster that we are facing in the (post)modernity of today. Eliot writes, apocalyptically, of "hooded hordes swarming / Over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth" (368-9). As we know, poetry can do political work, and although Eliot has been criticized for being too staunchly conservative, it is very possible that in terms of its ecopoetics The Waste Land functions both as a memorial for what had already been lost or destroyed, and as a harbinger for the ecological crises we are experiencing today. The environmental devastations of the First World War alone were unprecedented, with 16 million dead, countless mines abandoned and ready to explode, destroyed towns, villages, and whole mini-ecosystems and natural habitats all over Europe scarred with trenches, bombed-out fields, and mass graves. In this way, The Waste Land stands as a poetry of crisis,

whether we have been able to hear it or not. As Eliot knew, "human kind / Cannot bear very much reality" (Burnt Norton, 44-5); though our ears may not yet be attuned to hearing this kind of message from him. Still, we must admit that from our own vantage point Eliot's "Unreal City" and "Falling towers" have become our unreal world: the waste land of 1922 is still the waste land of today, and we are far from abolishing the ills that Eliot was anxiously representing. Still, if we can take Eliot's poem as, in part, a warning, we can also see that such warnings inherently contain hope. A hope, perhaps, that we do not have to keep living our lives in the waste lands of our modernities, and that we do not have to keep wrecking our earth and our ecosystems. The poem closes, after all, with the words, "Shantih shantih shantih" (433) - "the Peace which passeth understanding," as Eliot translates it from Sanskrit. This is an incantation that does both retrospective and proactive work, suggesting that beyond these pages there may be ways to discover peace.

# NOTES 

I Lawrence Buell, The Environmental Imagination: Thoreau, Nature Writing, and the Formation of American Culture (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), 288.

2 In his note to line 60 Eliot indicates that he is borrowing allusively from Charles Baudelaire's Les fleurs du mal. Baudelaire's book is generally considered to be the most important early instance in a post-pastoral literary tradition that renders modern urban life as baneful and ennui-filled. Consider, too, the recurrence of polluted fog in Eliot in relation to some of Charles Dickens's nineteenth-century portrayals of London, including the opening of Bleak House: "Fog everywhere. Fog up the river, where it flows among green aits and meadows; fog down the river, where it rolls defiled among the tiers of shipping and the waterside pollutions of a great (and dirty) city." Charles Dickens, Bleak House (1853; London: Penguin, 2003), 9. I am grateful to Patrick Moran for reminding me of this important parallel.
3 Michael North observes that this line comes directly from Canto Four of Dante's Inferno "in which Dante descends into the first circle of Hell, or Limbo, where those who died without baptism languish, sighing impotently, for there is nothing that can be done about their condition." T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land, ed. Michael North (New York: Norton, 2001), 7.
4 John Davy Hayward Bequest, King's College Library, Cambridge University.
5 Edmund Spenser, "Prothalamion," The Yale Edition of the Shorter Poems of Edmund Spenser, ed. William A. Oram, Einar Bjorvand, Ronald Bond, Thomas H. Cain, Alexander Dunlop, and Richard Schell (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989), 76 I.
6 Richard Lehan, The City in Literature: An Intellectual and Cultural History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 134.

7 Jonathan Bate, "The Economy of Nature," reprinted in Ecocriticism: The Essential Reader, ed. Ken Hiltner (New York: Routledge, 2015), 77.
8 Timothy Clark, The Cambridge Introduction to Literature and the Environment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), xiii. Italics in the original.
9 For the "First" and "Second" Caprices see Eliot, Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917, ed. Christopher Ricks (London: Faber and Faber, 1996), 13 and 15 .

10 For compelling arguments about the presence of Emily Hale in Eliot's poems about nostalgic and proleptic longing, see Lyndall Gordon's The Imperfect Life of T. S. Eliot (London: Virago, 2012).
I There is not space here to consider the centrality of the sea in Eliot's poetry, though we might at least say that it appears amazingly often, and, like the water of The Waste Land, it can be both destructive and restorative.
12 Eliot, "Hamlet and His Problems," The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism (London: Methuen, 1960), 100.
13 Barry Lopez, "Landscape and Narrative," Vintage Lopez (New York: Vintage, 2004), 6-7.

14 Terry Gifford, "Pastoral, Anti-Pastoral, and Post-Pastoral," The Cambridge Companion to Literature and the Environment, ed. Louise Westling (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 18.
15 Sigmund Freud, "Civilization and Its Discontents," 1930 [1929], The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, trans. James Strachey, 24 vols. (London: Hogarth Press, 1978), vol. XXI, 69-70.
16 Greg Garrard, Ecocriticism (London: Routledge, 2004), 61.
17 I owe thanks to Jahan Ramazani for suggesting that moments of respite do occur in a few instances outside of the pastoral, within the city; for example, in the aesthetic (and religiously inflected) contemplation of the "Inexplicable splendor of Ionian white and gold" in Magnus Martyr Church (265).
18 I quote from Lyndall Gordon's chapter in this volume, "'Mixing/Memory and Desire': What Eliot's Biography Can Tell Us," 45.
19 Eliot, The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism (1933; London: Faber and Faber, 1968), 148.
20 Richard Caddel, "Secretaries of Nature: Towards a Theory of Modernist Ecology," Ezra Pound: Nature and Myth, ed. William Pratt (New York: AMS Press, 2002), 139 .
21 For groundbreaking explorations of the relation of Romantic poets to landscape and ecology see especially John Barrell's The Dark Side of the Landscape: The Rural Poor in English Painting 1730-1840 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
22 Qtd. in Jonathan Bate, 92.
23 Ibid., 93.
24 Raymond Williams, "The Country and the City," 1975, reprinted in Ecocriticism: The Essential Reader, ed. Ken Hiltner (New York: Routledge, 2015), 35-8.

25 Caddel, 139 .

26 William Wordsworth, "Lines written a few miles above Tintern Abbey," William Wordsworth, ed. Stephen Gill (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), I34.
27 Eliot's way of reading The Waste Land aloud is famously controversial for the idiosyncracies of his accent, tone, and emphasis.
