# Coda: The Waste Land's Afterlife: The Poem's Reception in the Twentieth Century and Beyond 

"And as for The Waste Land," wrote Edmund Wilson less than a decade after the poem first appeared, "it enchanted and devastated a whole generation." ${ }^{1}$ Over the course of nearly a century now, generation after generation of scholars has confronted its enchanting and devastating powers, attempting to amplify, channel, or redirect them by emphasizing certain of its elements at the expense of others. As teachers, Eliot suggests, we may choose to "point to good literature and then be silent," presenting readers with "necessary and interesting facts" about the work. ${ }^{2}$ But for scholars, the edgy and avant-garde features of The Waste Land - its allusiveness, its poignancy, its junctures and disjuncture - compel us beyond those necessary facts into widening circles of interpretation and debate. In this essay, I hope to convey how that interpretation and debate has transformed in the years since the poem's publication, how the contested territories of the poem have been mapped and redrawn by succeeding generations - each time in the attempt to comprehend what Eliot calls the "collision" of encountering the poem afresh (52I).
"All critical judgments excite criticism," Eliot proposes. ${ }^{3}$ In roughly chronological order, and without addressing contemporary reviews of the poem, this essay will follow the dialectic whereby the judgments of early critics like Edmund Wilson and Cleanth Brooks excited the criticism of succeeding generations (Grover Smith and Hugh Kenner, for instance, or A. Walton Litz and Lyndall Gordon), which was in turn challenged and critiqued by later scholars. I will pay particular attention to the ways in which certain questions and ideas about the poem quickly gain and lose currency, whereas others return or remain to shape our understanding of The Waste Land, and of its enchantments and devastations, into the twenty-first century. ${ }^{4}$

Early Commentaries: 1924-43
Four landmark early commentaries on The Waste Land - by I. A. Richards, Edmund Wilson, F. R. Leavis, and F. O. Mattheissen - traced the lines of

debate that contemporary scholars still follow, including the problem of the poem's organization; the effect of its allusions and quotations; the multiplicity of its voices and the existence of a single protagonist; and the question of its overall trajectory or progress. I. A. Richards, an early supporter of Eliot who became a regular correspondent and interlocutor, included a brief appendix to the second edition of his widely influential study in method, Principles of Literary Criticism (1924; 2nd edition 1926) that deals primarily with The Waste Land. ${ }^{5}$ Richards extols both the poem's evasion of a logical, narrative order as well as its commitment to "a music of ideas," stressing its pattern of motifs and repetition that results in "a coherent whole of feeling and attitude" (293). He argues that the poem is essentially a compressed epic, and he concludes by asserting its universal qualities and suggesting that it embodies "the plight of a whole generation" (295). In addition, in another, later essay, Richards makes the well-known statement (to which Eliot objected in print) that Eliot had effected "a complete severance between his poetry and all beliefs." ${ }^{6}$

In Axel's Castle (1931), Edmund Wilson expands upon his own earlier reviews (including "The Poetry of Drouth," 1922) to characterize The Waste Land as a poem concerned with "emotional starvation" and cultural sterility. ${ }^{7}$ Wilson suggests that its desolation reflects the aftermath of World War I, "our post-War world of shattered institutions, strained nerves and bankrupt ideals," and he argues that, to confront these conflicts, Eliot abandons the symbolism of Laforgue and Corbière and embraces the new formal techniques for which the poem had become so renowned (106). Wilson also maintains that we need not understand all of Eliot's allusions for the emotive and imaginative power of The Waste Land to communicate itself. The poem conveys a completeness, he argues, that is not contingent upon its erudition (II3).
F. R. Leavis also devotes a chapter to Eliot in his seminal New Bearings in English Poetry (1932), objecting to the already common view that The Waste Land longs nostalgically for a bygone era. ${ }^{8}$ He expands upon Richards's musical analogy, arguing that the repetition and alteration of motifs generate a formal order in the absence of a more recognizable organizing principle. The multiplicity of voices, he contends, is intended "to focus an inclusive human consciousness," one that contains elements of all personalities (95). Most significantly, Leavis maintains that The Waste Land "exhibits no progression;" "the poem ends," he argues, "where it began" (103). F. O. Matthiessen's The Achievement of T. S. Eliot (1935) is among the best early syntheses of Eliot's work. Like Wilson, who discerns in the poem "the sterility of the Puritan Temperament," ${ }^{9}$ Matthiessen finds that The Waste Land possesses a sense of detachment and spiritual

calling indebted to nineteenth-century American literature. Ultimately, he also agrees with Wilson in regarding the poem as an intense reflection of "the post-War state of mind" with its "intolerable burden" and "lack of purpose and direction." ${ }^{10}$ These four foundational interpretations all frame the poem in formalist terms, recognizing an order and organization to The Waste Land as well as registering its broad cultural and historical scope. None, though, posits a trajectory toward spiritual or cultural fulfillment.

That task fell to Cleanth Brooks, whose "The Waste Land: A Critique of the Myth" first appeared in the Southern Review in 1937 but gained its widest readership after it was reprinted in his Modern Poetry and the Tradition (1939); it has been reprinted many times since. ${ }^{11}$ Brooks undertakes the most exacting and holistic interpretation of the poem yet, particularly regarding the Grail motifs and underlying fertility rituals to which Eliot's notes refer. Earlier, Matthiesen had doubted "whether Miss Weston's valuable study has enabled me to feel the poem more intensely" (50); George Williamson had likewise suggested, "what we need to understand is the emotional structure of The Waste Land, not the anthropology." ${ }^{12}$ But for Brooks, the proper (that is, not excessive) use of the framework derived from Sir James Frazer's The Golden Bough and Jesse Weston's From Ritual to Romance is "essential for an understanding of the poem." ${ }^{13}$ Rebuking the "misrepresentations" of the poem's nihilistic despair and disillusion by critics like Wilson - a proponent of what he calls "the stock interpretation" (166) - Brooks argues for The Waste Land's unity and narrative progress, which involves a protagonist on an epic journey through a land of spiritual and cultural decay. Brooks discerns a positive spiritual outcome in the poem, one modeled on the regenerative successes of the fertility rituals that Frazer and Weston describe. Brooks's work is also an early example of the enduring critical tendency to rely heavily upon Eliot's post-conversion views in order to understand and alleviate the anxieties of the earlier poems. Thus, he regards the wasted land as the product neither of postwar dread nor of emotional derangement but of "the secular attitude which dominates the modern world" (I44).

# Getting Used to The Waste Land: 1956-68 

Several revelations by Eliot himself in the late 1950 must be included in any account of the poem's reception; they have been quoted and excerpted to such an extent that they now appear almost as marginalia to The Waste Land. The first is his suggestion, in "The Frontiers of Criticism" (1956), that his notes had "led critics into temptation." ${ }^{14} \mathrm{He}$ admits that he composed them "with a view to spiking the guns of critics of my earlier poems

who had accused me of plagiarism" (12I). Referring to the notes as a "remarkable exposition of bogus scholarship," he writes: "I regret having sent so many enquirers off on a wild goose chase after Tarot cards and the Holy Grail" (121-2). Another oft-quoted statement by Eliot appears in his Paris Review interview (1959) with Donald Hall, wherein he refers to the poem as "structureless" and discusses Pound's revisions. ${ }^{15}$ Then, on the topic of obscurity in his early work, he says: "In The Waste Land, I wasn't even bothering whether I understood what I was saying. These things, however, become easier to people with time. You get used to having The Waste Land, or Ulysses, about" (Ibid., 64).

The two accounts that demonstrate just how "used to having The Waste Land about" scholars had become were also the two most influential interpretations of Eliot's work from this time until his death in 1965: Grover Smith's T. S. Eliot's Poetry and Plays: A Study in Sources and Meaning (1956) and Hugh Kenner's The Invisible Poet: T. S. Eliot (1959). Both works demonstrate a significant shift in critical attitudes and approaches to The Waste Land, and both remain relevant to contemporary interpretations. Scholarship had certainly begun to document the poem's dense network of sources before Smith; George Williamson's A Reader's Guide to T. S. Eliot (1953) is one such important forerunner. But Smith was the first to undertake an encyclopedic survey of sources throughout Eliot's extant corpus, and his two chapters on The Waste Land were the first to integrate systematically the familiar anthropological sources with less familiar ones from religion, literature, music, and mythology. Like Brooks, Smith assumes the existence of a protagonist, whom he calls "the quester," and he argues for a continuous arc of development through the poem. The plot of The Waste Land, "as Tiresias recounts it," includes failures at crucial moments of potentially regenerative initiation: thus, he writes, "the quest fails, and the poem ends with a formula for purgatorial suffering." ${ }^{16}$

Hugh Kenner, on the contrary, insists that The Waste Land is "graspable without source-hunting, and without even appeal to any but the most elementary knowledge of one or two myths and a few Shakespearean tags." ${ }^{17}$ Kenner believes that the poem dramatizes the problems of isolation and anguished solitude that had occupied Eliot since his doctoral study of the philosophy of F. H. Bradley. On the vexed question of the notes, he declares, "we shall do well to discard the notes as much as possible:" "they have bedeviled discussion for decades" ( 150 ). Kenner may be remembered by many for his idiosyncrasies and irreverence, but his chapters on The Waste Land derive their persuasiveness from his meticulous and sensitive examination of its points of view, its implied narration, and what he calls its "functional obscurity, sibylline fragments so disposed as to yield the utmost in

connotative power" (159). His ingenuity sometimes leads him into dubious territory, as when he suggests that the hyacinth girl is the drowned victim of a murder akin to those later described in Eliot's plays (162-4). But overall, his refusal to "tour the Eliot territory in chartered buses" results in valuable insights and correctives (xi). Perhaps most importantly, his rejection of the "official" Eliot provided readers with a new and less staid alternative to the imperious figure that had become the target of critiques such as The T.S. Eliot Myth (1951), in which Rossell Hope Robbins calls Eliot "a poet of minor achievement" whom critics had "exalted ... into a great poet and an advanced cultural leader." ${ }^{18}$

It would be difficult to overstate the value of a book like B. C. Southam's A Guide to the Selected Poems of T. S. Eliot (1968), which assembles and condenses the available scholarship on Eliot's work into orderly, readable annotations keyed to line numbers and mostly free from the burden of argument. Southam's guide, which reached its sixth edition in 1994, devotes a third of its nearly 300 pages to documenting the sources, allusions, and textual and publication details of The Waste Land. Southam offers translations from the editions that Eliot owned; he provides context from periodical publications and correspondence; and, in the introduction, he considers the vexed status of the notes at length. At times, his annotations are brief and purely factual (the Starnbergersee, "a fashionable lake-resort just south of Munich, visited by Eliot in August 1911"); ${ }^{19}$ at others, they synthesize the work of previous scholars; and at still others, they offer new insights about possible sources, such as Rupert Brooke's "The Old Vicarage, Grantchester" and the "poignant flashes of memory" and desire that it shares with "The Burial of the Dead" (139). Southam also transcribes invaluable notes on the poem by John Hayward, Eliot's longtime friend and flatmate, who jotted them on manuscripts while he was helping to prepare a French translation in $1946-7$.

# After the Facsimile Edition: 1971-3 

Arguably the most important publication in the history of the poem's critical reception was brought forth not by a scholar but by the poet's widow, Valerie Eliot, who edited the facsimile edition of The Waste Land's earliest "reception." The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound (1971) invigorated and transformed scholarship on the poem for a multitude of reasons, not least that it seemed to grant the author's own posthumous approval to the growing number of critics already beginning to argue against the alleged unity and structural coherence of the poem. The most notable of the many initial

responses to this trove of archival materials is Richard Ellmann's review in The New York Review of Books, which draws upon Eliot's biography to argue that "the poem may be a covert memorial to Henry Ware Eliot, the unforgiving father of the ill-adventured son." ${ }^{20}$ William Empson arrives at a similar conclusion in his extended review-essay on the edition, ${ }^{21}$ while Helen Gardner's "The Waste Land: Paris 1922" continues the effort to decipher the order of the manuscript's composition and gauge the effects of Pound's excisions. ${ }^{22}$ But the most exhaustively researched and persuasively argued account of the new materials was undertaken by Lyndall Gordon, first in "The Waste Land Manuscript" (1974) and then, wholly afresh, in her biography Eliot's Early Years (1977). ${ }^{23}$ Gordon's archival research - and her close examination of watermarks, typefaces, and other material evidence produces a compelling narrative of the poem's personal origins, dating back to fragments likely composed in 1914. Gordon regards The Waste Land as a narrative of spiritual revelation and upheaval, and in the first essay, she concludes that Pound's excisions shifted the "hoard of fragments" away from Eliot's highly personal, spiritual torment and toward a representation of "common cultural experience." ${ }^{24}$ In Eliot's Early Years (revised and reprinted with its sequel as T. S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life in 1998, and then further revised in 2012), Gordon again draws upon unpublished manuscripts and archival materials to describe the poem's origins in Eliot's disintegrating marriage, its continuation of the powerful spiritual sensibility evident in his earliest poetry, and its movement toward "purification and metamorphosis." ${ }^{25}$ She also amplifies her earlier reading of Pound's revisions, arguing that he actually "blocked, at several points, Eliot's impulse to exhibit the strength as well as the sickness of the suffering soul." ${ }^{26}$

Of the three essay compilations published in the early 1970s to coincide with the fiftieth anniversary of the poem, A. Walton Litz's Eliot in His Time (1973) testifies most forcefully to the proliferation and vitality of new responses after the facsimile edition. ${ }^{27}$ The most provocative contributions to this volume emphasize The Waste Land's modes of fragmentation, dislocation, and interruption rather than its structures and coherence. In "The Waste Land Fifty Years After," Litz himself urges readers away from the "standard," fixed interpretations of the poem as a narrative of religious experience (referring to the "burden of spiritual significance" that it had been forced to bear) and toward its more chaotic, satiric, and experimental elements. ${ }^{28}$ Against critics who detect moral values and judgments in the poem, Litz maintains that Eliot's intention was, rather, "a delicate balance of attitudes" (7). He writes: "much might be gained if readers of The Waste Land could, for a few years, adopt the motto which Mark Twain affixed to Huckleberry Finn: 'persons attempting to find a moral in [this work] will be

banished; persons attempting to find a plot in it will be shot'" (7). In "The Urban Apocalypse" from the same volume, Hugh Kenner suggests that the original poem was much more clearly a satiric portrait of London, an "urban panorama refracted through Augustan styles," and that revision produced the apocalyptic tone that dominates the final text. ${ }^{29}$ An equally compelling study in the volume, however, is "New Modes of Characterization in The Waste Land" by Robert Langbaum, who argues on behalf of the poem's undetected continuities and thus against Kenner and Litz. The continuity of character, Langbaum concludes, allows for "a more consistent structure on the model of romantic monodrama." ${ }^{30}$

Nearly ten years after the appearance of her edition of Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley (1964), a milestone in Eliot studies, Anne C. Bolgan published What the Thunder Really Said (1973), in which she combines her expertise on Eliot's doctoral work with a reassessment of the facsimile edition to gauge the distance between the poem's potential and its achievement. Bolgan contends that The Waste Land was "aiming to be" a monologue similar to Eliot's earlier work yet broader in scope, but that Eliot encountered unresolvable conflicts, both philosophical and literary, implicit in the project; "the poem foundered" as a result. ${ }^{31}$ She concludes that The Waste Land is a failure, though "of such failures, it can only be said that we could certainly use more of them" (I63).

# Interlude: Jean Verdenal, John Peter, and James Miller 

Few contemporary scholars would deny that Eliot enjoyed a rich and formative relationship with Jean Verdenal, the French medical student whom he met in Paris in 1910 and who died in 1915 during the war. To understand, however, the significance of James E. Miller's claims about homoeroticism in T. S. Eliot's Personal Waste Land: Exorcism of the Demons (1977), we must follow a circuitous route: first, back to 1969, when John Peter's "A New Interpretation of The Waste Land" was revised and republished in Essays in Criticism; then, back to the original appearance of Peter's article in the same review in 1952, when it sparked controversy by contending that the poem's speaker had "fallen completely - perhaps the right word is irretrievably - in love" with "a young man who soon afterwards met his death." ${ }^{32}$ Throughout the poem, but especially in the figure of the drowned sailor, Peter argues, the speaker makes oblique tributes to an intense experience of homoerotic love and bereavement. Soon after the article appeared, Eliot's solicitors sent a letter insisting that its "further dissemination" be halted and that unsold copies of the journal be destroyed (166). Though Peter later insists that this action made copies of the issue rare and "unprocurable for

seventeen years," editor F. H. Bateson reports that only thirty undistributed copies were destroyed. ${ }^{33}$ In his "Postscript" to the 1969 version, reprinted with subtle revisions after Eliot's death, Peter abandons his former discretion about identifying the speaker with Eliot, and simply asserts that "anyone reading Eliot with real attentiveness today, I think, can hardly avoid the conclusion that in his youth he had a close romantic attachment to another man" (166). ${ }^{34}$ In 1976, George Watson challenged Peter's emboldened speculation with his own biographical research, a well-documented investigation into Verdenal titled "Quest for a Frenchman," in which he demonstrates that Verdenal was not likely a model for Phlebas and that, despite the intensity of Eliot's relationship with him, there is nothing to suggest that either man was homosexual. ${ }^{35}$

In 1977, however, James E. Miller extended Peter's argument in T. S. Eliot's Personal Waste Land, in which he argues that The Waste Land was shaped primarily by Eliot's memory of this singular relationship and bereavement. Although Miller emphasizes that his argument does not hinge upon Eliot's sexuality, he nonetheless contends that the loss and devastation conveyed throughout The Waste Land derive mainly from the author's powerful and sexualized memories of Verdenal, his grief over the man's death, and the anguish resulting from Eliot's precipitous marriage to Vivienne. Scholars criticize Miller for his "detective-fiction" style and the circularity by which he speculates about the poem based upon speculations about Eliot's personal life, speculations that are, themselves, derived from an interpretation of the poem. ${ }^{36} \mathrm{He}$ elaborates an iconoclastic and influential thesis, however, that has continued to influence portrayals of Eliot's life, including Michael Hastings's play Tom and Viv (1984) and especially Carol Seymour-Jones's scurrilous biography, Painted Shadow: A Life of Vivienne Eliot (2001). Other critics have tended to recapitulate Miller's conclusions with a critical shorthand of sorts. For instance, with one reference to Miller's book in its entirety, Wayne Koestenbaum simply refers to "Eliot's arguably sexual interest in Verdenal," which is "repressed in the poem" and therefore produces "hysterical discontinuities." ${ }^{37}$ Contemporary scholars of other modernist writers have followed suit, referring to "Eliot's possible latent homosexuality" and relying on Miller and Seymour-Jones to support assertions such as "Eliot's expression of his tender love toward Verdenal fills the pages of The Waste Land." ${ }^{38}$ Miller himself expanded his own thesis to encompass the whole of Eliot's early career in T. S. Eliot: The Making of an American Poet: 1888-1922 (2005).

A number of studies that address the poem more persuasively in terms of gender and queer studies have emerged in recent years. In Deviant Modernism (1998) Colleen Lamos suggests that the poem "depicts in painful and desperate ways the modern dilemma of masculine

heterosexuality" and is "symptomatic of modern masculine uneasiness." ${ }^{39}$ Cassandra Laity and Nancy Gish coedited Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot (2004), which has become an indispensable source on these topics throughout Eliot's work. ${ }^{40}$ In particular, in his contribution, "T. S. Eliot, famous clairvoyante," Tim Dean offers a compelling alternative reading of The Waste Land based on queer theory, one which also deftly critiques biographical speculation about Eliot's sexuality. ${ }^{41}$ In "T. S. Eliot: The Performativity of Gender in The Waste Land" (2005) and elsewhere, Cyrena Pondrom focuses upon how "textual qualities which foster gender ambiguity" force readers to construct complicated and often implicitly gender-biased discourses about the poem. ${ }^{42}$ Ed Madden's Tiresian Poetics (2008) and Gabrielle McIntire's Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T.S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (2008) both offer further reflections upon what Madden calls a "troubled relation" to the male body, homoerotic discourses, and male sexuality. ${ }^{43}$

# Philosophy, Hermeneutics, and Biography: 1979-late 1980 os 

A spate of essays and monographs in the late 1970 and 1980 s brought the increasingly popular methods of literary theory to bear on The Waste Land. Some involve more or less straightforward "applications" of deconstructive approaches to the literary text, like those by William Spanos and Margaret Uroff. ${ }^{44}$ In "The Waste Land: Ur-Text of Deconstruction," Ruth Nevo proposes an argument that has since become familiar indeed, namely, that Eliot's poem prefigures the strategies of poststructuralist theory, that it can "now be read as a postmodernist poem ... as a deconstructionist Ur-text, even as a Deconstructionist Manifesto." ${ }^{45}$ In T. S. Eliot and the Poetics of Literary History (1983), Gregory S. Jay also argues that deconstructive and psychoanalytic methods were already implicit in Eliot's work. Cyrena Pondrom uses a similar formulation regarding gender performativity. ${ }^{46}$ Cultural studies and feminist theory intervened around this time, just as they did in the discipline of literary theory generally, to critique deconstructive readings. For instance, Alison Tate argues that The Waste Land, despite its seeming disjunctions and polyvocality, is a text firmly embedded in the hierarchical Western literary tradition, one that "echoes the order of a tradition narrowly based in terms of sex and class" and therefore simply magnifies stereotypes and hierarchies while parading as "the acceptable face of modernism." ${ }^{47}$

Several works from the 1980 s, also grounded in theory, exemplify the periodic tendency to downplay the importance of The Waste Land's structures, myths, and allusions and to emphasize instead its absences and omissions. In T. S. Eliot's Negative Way (1982), Eloise Knapp Hay adapts existentialist

philosophy in an attempt to read The Waste Land without the distorting hindsight of Eliot's conversion and later writings. For Hay, it is "a poem of radical doubt and negation, urging that every human desire be stilled except the desire for self-surrender, for restraint, and for peace." ${ }^{48}$ Harriet Davidson also owes the ethos of her T. S. Eliot and Hermeneutics (1985) to the philosophy of existentialism, especially that of Martin Heidegger, arguing that The Waste Land "is a poem full of strategic absences." ${ }^{49}$ As readers, she reflects, our first and most salient experience of the poem involves, in fact, "the absence of expected connections or sources;" more important still is what she calls the "powerful and disturbing" absence of a central and controlling consciousness (2-3). In The Poetics of Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound (1987), Maud Ellmann offers a psychoanalytic reading that draws from Freud and Kristeva to argue that The Waste Land is "a sphinx without a secret:" "to force it to confession may also be a way of killing it." ${ }^{50}$ She contends that Eliot's central focus in the poem is waste and detritus, or "the abject;" that the poem dramatizes the fear of infection and anxiety about taboo; and that these anxieties help it to "stage the ritual of its own destruction" (109).

Reading The Waste Land: Modernism and the Limits of Interpretation (1990) by Jewel Spears Brooker and Joseph Bentley resembles the work by Hay, Davidson, and Ellmann in its focus on evidence of interpretation and processes of hermeneutics, but it is framed primarily by Eliot's own philosophical background rather than by post-World War II philosophy and critical theory. That is, Brooker and Bentley discern a variety of interpretative practices at work in the poem itself, acts that occur before any interpretations by scholars. They describe their project as "metahermeneutics: interpretation of interpretations and of their denial." ${ }^{51}$ Brooker and Bentley show how The Waste Land provokes increasingly complicated and bifurcated problems of understanding. The authors argue that the poem's power ultimately emerges, however, from below or "before" these layers of interpretation, a "condition of infancy" (Piaget) or an "immediate experience" (Bradley) that precedes them, or in their words, "a perfect wordless love that existed before all languages and all meaning" (222).

Valuable advances in biographical studies of Eliot in the 1980 os including Peter Ackroyd's T. S. Eliot: A Life (1984) and Lyndall Gordon's Eliot's New Life (1988) - were accompanied by several wide-ranging attempts to synthesize Eliot's corpus, two of which deserve mention here. In the chapter of Thomas Stearns Eliot: Poet (1979) dealing with The Waste Land, "Tiresias Transformed," A. David Moody argues on behalf of the poem's powerful focus on the individual, rejecting accounts that emphasize solely its cultural and historical commentary: "to read the poem only

as a critique of its culture ... is to be rather simple minded; it is to make out the mind of Europe perhaps, but to miss the poet's mind." ${ }^{52}$ Moody finds a profoundly individualized effort toward self-transcendence, a distinctly emotional (as opposed to spiritual) transcendence that carries the poem's focus beyond the limited perspective of Tiresias. Ronald Bush's T. S. Eliot: A Study in Character and Style (1984) is equally wide-ranging, drawing from Eliot's life and work to address how the poet gives form and order to psychological pressures. In two chapters, "The Poet's Inner World of Nightmare" and "Unknown Terror and Mystery: The Waste Land," Bush argues persuasively that the power of The Waste Land arises from the ways that it channels and organizes "the world of unconscious impulse," particularly the way that it resembles the patterns of nightmare and dreamscape rather than those of conventional epic narrative or quest. What connects the segments of the poem "is precisely what connects the disparate segments of our most distressing dreams.... A dramatic situation emerges, intensifies mysteriously ... and then, just before the situation is clarified, disperses; then a new situation arises that seems comfortingly different but is in fact the same anew." ${ }^{53}$ Moody and Bush's shared emphasis on the individual, psychological elements of the poem reflect another periodically recurring critical desire, namely, to renew the experience of reading The Waste Land by rediscovering its personal, emotive energies rather than tracing its philosophical or hermeneutic complexities.

# Returning to Origins: Late 1980 s-present 

Several influential studies in recent decades have begun to follow a recognizable pattern that we might describe as a return to origins, whether these be anthropological (primitivism and decadence), economic (publishing institutions and periodical networks), scholarly (earlier readings of the poem), or material (typewriters and watermarks). Robert Crawford's The Savage and the City in the Work of T. S. Eliot (1987) is one such influential study with particular importance for understanding how The Waste Land fits into Eliot's lifelong attempt to calibrate the relationship between primitive and sophisticated societies. Crawford's most valuable contribution to scholarship pertaining to The Waste Land, however, is the evidence he assembles to show its indebtedness to the urban visions of decadent poets Francis Thompson, John Davidson, and Rudyard Kipling. Jewel Spears Brooker undertakes a valuable series of returns in Mastery and Escape (1994), particularly in the two chapters that offer needful correctives to widespread misunderstandings of the places of Frazer and Bradley in The Waste Land. ${ }^{54}$ Calvin Bedient returns to earlier readings of

the poem and its central poet-quester or romantic hero in He Do the Police in Different Voices: The Waste Land and Its Protagonist (1986). Bedient argues for "an all-centering, autobiographical protagonist-narrator" that unifies the poem and clarifies its most powerful elements. ${ }^{55}$ In T. S. Eliot and the Politics of Voice: The Argument of The Waste Land (1987), John Xiros Cooper advocates another explicit return, this time to the poem's "sociohistoric contexts," particularly its engagement with the cultural and ideological inheritance of Victorian England. Cooper contends that The Waste Land "mercilessly dismembers the typical humanist accounts of experience inscribed in the discursive practices of the progressive Victorians." ${ }^{56}$

The most significant publications on the poem in recent years are Lawrence Rainey's Revisiting The Waste Land and The Annotated Waste Land with Eliot's Contemporary Prose, simultaneously published in 2005. The central element of Revisiting The Waste Land is Rainey's meticulous examination of hundreds of letters and typescripts in the attempt to date accurately the bundle of fragments and poems included in the facsimile edition. Rainey follows every lead with forensic attention to detail, from chainlines and watermarks to swapped typewriters with wide vs. crabbed finishing strokes. His argument persuasively demonstrates that, contrary to what some scholars had believed, The Waste Land was composed, with few exceptions, in the order in which it ultimately first appeared. Combining his forensic analyses with a scrupulous examination of biographical accounts allows Rainey to reconstruct the most definitive chronology of the poem's composition yet. ${ }^{57}$ Rainey's other chapters address the elaborate prepublication maneuvering of Eliot, Pound, and several potential publishers of the poem, as well as the drastic transformation of The Waste Land's reputation in the decades following its appearance. As so many scholars have done, Rainey contends that Cleanth Brooks "profoundly misread" the poem by discerning its unified, Christian theme, and that scholarship still suffers from his misreading. ${ }^{58} \mathrm{He}$ urges readers to liberate themselves from the "dominance" of New Critical readings like Brooks's and to experience, instead, its "lacerating wildness" by returning to a point of view similar to that of the poem's earliest readers (127-8). Rainey's edition of the poem, The Annotated Waste Land, includes copious annotations on the poem and on eleven uncollected pieces of prose, as well as a collation of variants from all versions of the poem through 1936.

Perhaps the most refreshing and influential contemporary research has been the result of a return to underappreciated aspects of the poem's cultural and historical contexts. Matthew Gold, Amanda Harris, and Nancy Gish, for instance, have all written compelling accounts of the long shadows cast across the poem by the psychological theories and practice of Roger

Vittoz, who treated Eliot at Lausanne, and Pierre Janet, whom Eliot studied at Harvard. ${ }^{59}$ Another fruitful and influential line of contemporary research involves Eliot's long-underestimated appreciation of popular culture, including music hall and jazz; Sebastian Knowles, Jonna Mackin, Barry Faulk, and especially David Chinitz in his T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (2003) have offered valuable new information about this aspect of his career and of The Waste Land in particular. ${ }^{60}$

There is little doubt that scholarship is on the cusp of another major shift in the critical history of The Waste Land. The first volume of Eliot's letters (1898-1922) was revised and republished in 2009 under the editorship of Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, whose swift production of subsequent volumes continues to affect the study of The Waste Land. For instance, in the fourth volume (1928-1929), Eliot confides to E. M. Forster that "the Waste Land might have been just the same without the War." ${ }^{61}$ The annotated, definitive edition of Eliot's complete prose is being published, in eight volumes, under the general editorship of Ronald Schuchard. And Faber and Faber will soon issue the first scholarly edition of Eliot's complete poems, edited by Christopher Ricks. Such a remarkable fusion of scholarship, along with the new access to unpublished and archival materials, will lead to a deepening and transforming awareness of the rich, strange, and dangerous magic of what is likely the twentieth century's most discussed poem. On the brink of a new era in Eliot studies, it is hard to disagree with Paul Muldoon when he declares, in the 2013 landmark reissue of the Boni and Liveright first edition of the poem, "It's almost impossible to think of a world in which The Waste Land did not exist." ${ }^{62}$

# NOTES 

I Edmund Wilson, Axel's Castle: A Study in the Imaginative Literature of 1870-1930 (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1931), 113-14.
2 T. S. Eliot, "The Education of Taste," The Athenaeum 4652 (June 27, 1919): 521 $[520-2 \mathrm{I}]$.
3 Eliot, "John Donne," The Nation and the Athenaeum 33 (June 9, 1923), 332 $[33 \mathrm{I}-32]$.
4 There are ample resources available for readers interested in contemporary responses to The Waste Land, especially in Jewel Spears Brooker's T. S. Eliot: The Contemporary Reviews (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004). Teachers of the poem will find an accessible selection of excerpts from early reviews in Michael North's The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition (New York: Norton, 2001), 139-66. See also Michael Grant's T. S. Eliot: The Critical Heritage (New York: Routledge \& Kegan Paul, 1982), a two-volume compilation of selected reviews by Eliot's contemporaries, and Graham Clarke's expansive T. S. Eliot: Critical Assessments (London: C. Helm, 1990), with four volumes of similar excerpts; the second volume includes a selection on The

Waste Land through 1987. Other valuable guides to the criticism of the poem include Robert Canary's T. S. Eliot: The Poet and His Critics (Chicago: American Library Association, 1982); T. S. Eliot: Man and Poet, vol. 2, by Sebastian Knowles and Scott Leonard (Orono, ME: National Poetry Association, 1992); Mildred Martin's A Half-Century of Eliot Criticism: An Annotated Bibliography of Books and Articles in English, 1916-1965 (Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press, 1972); Beatrice Ricks's T. S. Eliot: A Bibliography of Secondary Works (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1980); and especially the chapter-length surveys of scholarship in the two volumes of Sixteen Modern American Authors (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1974; 1990) by Richard Ludwig and Stuart McDougal, respectively. Readers interested in a more inclusive and narrative account of the poem's reception should consult the excellent introduction by Lois A. Cuddy and David Hirsch in Critical Essays on T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land (Boston: G.K. Hall, 1991), 1-24.
5 I. A. Richards, Principles of Literary Criticism (New York: Harcourt, 1926), 289.
6 Richards, Science and Poetry (New York: Norton, 1926), 76.
7 Wilson, Axel's Castle, 104. In "The Poetry of Drouth," Wilson writes that the poem captures "the starvation of a whole civilization." Qtd. in T. S. Eliot: The Contemporary Reviews, ed. Jewel Spears Brooker (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 86 [83-87].
8 F. R. Leavis, New Bearings in English Poetry (1932; rpt. London: Chatto \& Windus, 1942). Cf. Malcolm Cowley's slightly later remark: "The idea was a simple one. Beneath the rich symbolism of The Waste Land, the wide learning expressed in seven languages ... the poet is saying that the present is inferior to the past." Exile's Return (New York: Norton, 1934; rpt. Penguin, 1994), I12-13.
9 Wilson, Axel's Castle, 105 .
Io F. O. Matthiessen, The Achievement of T. S. Eliot: An Essay on the Nature of Poetry, 3rd edition (1935; New York: Oxford University Press, 1959), 21.
II See, for example, Leonard Unger's T. S. Eliot: A Selected Critique (New York: Rinehart, 1948), 319-48; Michael North also reprints it in the Norton Critical Edition. Contemporary scholars frequently suggest that Brooks's reading had an overpowering effect on later scholarship. Lawrence Rainey writes that this essay "profoundly shaped the course of criticism on the poem for the next forty years." Revisiting The Waste Land (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005), 117. See, however, Armour H. Nelson's early critical survey, "The Critics and The Waste Land, 1922-1949," in which Brooks is merely one among the many contending critical voices. English Studies 36 (1955): 1-15.
12 George Williamson, The Talent of T. S. Eliot (Seattle: University of Washington Book Store, 1929), 33.
13 Cleanth Brooks, Modern Poetry and the Tradition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939), 137.
14 Eliot, On Poetry and Poets (New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1957), 12 I [113-3I].
15 Donald Hall, "The Art of Poetry, I: T. S. Eliot," Paris Review 2 I (Spring/Summer 1959): $53[47-70]$.
16 Grover Smith, T. S. Eliot's Poetry and Plays (1956; rpt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965), 71.
17 Hugh Kenner, The Invisible Poet (1959; rpt. New York: Harcourt, 1969), 15 I.

18 Rossell Hope Robbins, The T. S. Eliot Myth (New York: Schuman, 1951), 169.
19 B. C. Southam, A Guide to the Selected Poems of T. S. Eliot, 6th edition (1968; New York: Harcourt, 1994), 139.
20 Richard Ellmann, "The First Waste Land," Eliot in His Time: Essays on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of The Waste Land, ed. A. Walton Litz (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973), 6I [51-66]; originally in The New York Review of Books 17 (November 18, 1971): 10-16.
21 William Empson, "My God Man There's Bears On It," Essays in Criticism 22 (October 1972): 417-29.
22 Helen Gardner, "The Waste Land: Paris 1922," Eliot in His Time, 67-94.
23 Lyndall Gordon, "The Waste Land Manuscript," American Literature 45 (January 1974): 557-70.
24 Ibid., 557,565 .
25 Gordon, T. S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life (New York: Norton, 1998), 182.
26 Ibid., 187.
27 See also Ulysses and The Waste Land, Fifty Years After, ed. R. G. Collins and Kenneth McRobbie (Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press, 1972) and The Waste Land in Different Voices, ed. A. C. Charity and A. D. Moody (New York: St. Martin's, 1974).
28 A. Walton Litz, "The Waste Land Fifty Years After," Eliot in His Time, 8 [3-22].
29 Kenner, Eliot in His Time, 46 [23-49].
30 Langbaum, Eliot in His Time, 109 [95-128].
3 I Anne C. Bolgan, What the Thunder Really Said: A Retrospective Essay on the Making of The Waste Land (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 1973), 15.
32 John Peter, "A New Interpretation of The Waste Land," Essays in Criticism 19 (April 1969): 142 [140-75].
33 Ibid., 165; F. H. Bateson, "Preface to the Reprint Edition," Essays in Criticism (Amsterdam, 1975), vol. I, no pagination.
34 See Timothy Materer's meticulous examination of the revisions in "T. S. Eliot and His Biographical Critics," Essays in Criticism 62 (January 2012): 41-57.
35 George Watson, "Quest for a Frenchman," The Sewanee Review 84 (Summer 1976): 465-75.

36 For instance, J. E. Dearlove's review in American Literature 50 (November 1978): 499-501.

37 Wayne Koestenbaum, "The Waste Land: T. S. Eliot's and Ezra Pound's Collaboration on Hysteria," Twentieth-Century Literature 34 (1988): 124 [113-39].
38 Monika Faltejskova, Djuna Barnes, T. S. Eliot, and the Gender Dynamics of Modernism: Tracing Nightwood (New York: Routledge, 2010), 81. For a series of articles on the biography of Verdenal, see Claudio Perinot's "Jean Verdenal: T. S. Eliot's French Friend," Annali di Cà Foscari-Università di Venezia 35 (1996): 265-75; "Further Notes on the Friendship of Jean Verdenal and T. S. Eliot," ANQ 2 I (Summer 2008): 44-54; and "Jean Verdenal, An Extraordinary Young Man: T. S. Eliot's mort aux Dardanelles," South Atlantic Review 76 (Summer 2011): 33-50.
39 Colleen Lamos, Deviant Modernism: Sexual and Textual Errancy in T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Marcel Proust (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), I10-I I.

40 Cassandra Laity and Nancy Gish, eds., Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
41 "T. S. Eliot, famous clairvoyante," Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot, 43-65.
42 Cyrena Pondrom, "T. S. Eliot: The Performativity of Gender in The Waste Land," Modernism/modernity 12 (September 2005): 426 [425-4I]; see also Pondrom's "Conflict and Concealment: Eliot's Approach to Women and Gender," A Companion to T. S. Eliot, ed. David Chinitz (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2009), 323-34, as well as Patrick Query's "'The pleasures of higher vices': Sexuality in Eliot's Work," in the same volume (350-62).
43 Ed Madden, Tiresian Poetics: Modernism, Sexuality, Voice, 1888-2001 (Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2008), 108 [108-75]; Gabrielle McIntire, Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T. S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
44 William Spanos, "Repetition in The Waste Land: A Phenomenological De-Struction, boundary 2 (Spring 1979): 225-85; Margaret Dickie Uroff, "The Waste Land: Metatext," Centennial Review 24 (1980): 148-66.
45 Ruth Nevo, "The Waste Land: Ur-Text of Deconstruction," New Literary History 13 (Spring 1982): 454 [453-6I].
46 "T. S. Eliot profoundly anticipates a fundamental cluster of concepts taken ... to be post-modern," she writes (Pondrom, "T. S. Eliot: The Performativity of Gender in The Waste Land," 425).
47 Alison Tate, "The Master-Narrative of Modernism: Discourses of Gender and Class in The Waste Land," Literature and History 14 (Fall 1988): 169 [160-71].
48 Eloise Knapp Hay, T. S. Eliot's Negative Way (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), 48.
49 Harriet Davidson, T. S. Eliot and Hermeneutics: Absence and Interpretation in The Waste Land (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985), 2.
50 Maud Ellmann, The Poetics of Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1987), 9 I [91-109].
5 I Jewel Spears Brooker and Joseph Bentley, Reading The Waste Land: Modernism and the Limits of Interpretation (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1990), 63.

52 A. David Moody, Thomas Stearns Eliot: Poet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 79 [79-I I I].
53 Ronald Bush, T. S. Eliot: A Study in Character and Style (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984), 6I.
54 Jewel Spears Brooker, Mastery and Escape: T. S. Eliot and the Dialectic of Modernism (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1994); see especially "The Case of the Missing Abstraction: Eliot, Frazer, and Modernism" (I 10-22) and "F. H. Bradley's Doctrine of Experience in T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land and Four Quartets" (191-206).
55 Calvin Bedient, He Do the Police in Different Voices: The Waste Land and Its Protagonist (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), ix.
56 John Xiros Cooper, T. S. Eliot and the Politics of Voice: The Argument of The Waste Land (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1987), 3.
57 See however Jim McCue's objections to Rainey's chronology in "Editing Eliot," Essays in Criticism 56 (January 2006): 1-27.

58 Lawrence Rainey, Revisiting The Waste Land (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2005), 124 .
59 Matthew K. Gold, "The Expert Hand and the Obedient Heart: Dr. Vittoz, T. S. Eliot, and the Therapeutic Possibilities of The Waste Land," Journal of Modern Literature 23 (Summer 2000): 519-33; Amanda Jeremin Harris, "T. S. Eliot's Mental Hygiene," Journal of Modern Literature 29 (Summer 2006): 44-56; Nancy K. Gish, "'Gerontion' and The Waste Land: Prelude to Altered Consciousness," T. S. Eliot, Dante, and the Idea of Europe, ed. Paul Douglass (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2011), 29-37.
60 Sebastian Knowles, "'Then You Wink the Other Eye': T. S. Eliot and the Music Hall," ANQ II (Fall 1998): 20-32; Jonna Mackin, "Raising Life to Kind of Art: Eliot and Music Hall," T. S. Eliot's Orchestra: Critical Essays on Poetry and Music, ed. John Xiros Cooper (New York: Garland, 2000); Barry Faulk, "Modernism and the Popular: Eliot's Music Halls," Modernism/modernity 8 (November 2001): 603-21; 49-63; David Chinitz, T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003).
6I T. S. Eliot to E. M. Forster, August io, 1929, in The Letters of T.S. Eliot, Volume 4: 1928-1929, ed. Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013), 573 .
62 Paul Muldoon, "Introduction," The Waste Land (New York: Liveright, 2013), 5 $[5-24]$.
