# A SHORT GUIDE TO FURTHER READING 

Peter Ackroyd, T. S. Eliot: A Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984).
G. Douglas Atkins, T. S. Eliot, Lancelot Andrews, and the Word: Intersections of Literature and Christianity (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 201 I).
David Ayers, Modernism: A Short Introduction (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004).
Richard Badenhausen, T.S. Eliot and the Art of Collaboration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Calvin Bedient, He Do the Police in Different Voices: The Waste Land and Its Protagonist (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1986).
Harold Bloom, ed., T. S. Eliot (Broomall, PA: Chelsea House, 1999).
ed., T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land, updated edition (1986; New York: Chelsea House, 2007).
Neville Braybrooke, ed., T. S. Eliot: A Symposium for His Seventieth Birthday (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy, 1958).
Jewel Spears Brooker, Mastery and Escape: T. S. Eliot and the Dialectic of Modernism (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1994).
Jewel Spears Brooker and Joseph Bentley, Reading The Waste Land: Modernism and the Limits of Interpretation (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1990).
Jewel Spears Brooker, ed., T. S. Eliot and Our Turning World (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Macmillan Press, 200I).
ed., T. S. Eliot: The Contemporary Reviews (London: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Cleanth Brooks, Modern Poetry and the Tradition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1939).
Ronald Bush, T. S. Eliot: A Study in Character and Style (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983).
ed., T. S. Eliot: The Modernist in History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
David E. Chinitz, T. S. Eliot and the Cultural Divide (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993).
ed., A Companion to T. S. Eliot, (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009).
Graham Clarke, T. S. Eliot: Critical Assessments (London: C. Helm, 1990).
Sarah Cole, At the Violet Hour: Modernism and Violence in England and Ireland (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012).
John Xiros Cooper, The Cambridge Introduction to T. S. Eliot (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006).

ed., T. S. Eliot's Orchestra (New York: Garland, 2000).
Michael Coyle, Debra Rae Cohen, and Jane Lewty, eds., Broadcasting Modernism (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2009).
Robert Crawford, The Savage and the City in the Work of T. S. Eliot (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987).
Anthony Cuda, The Passions of Modernism: Eliot, Yeats, Woolf, and Mann (New York: Columbia University Press, 20I0).
Elizabeth Däumer and Shyamal Bagchee, eds., The International Reception of T. S. Eliot (London: Continuum, 2007).
Harriet Davidson, ed., T. S. Eliot (New York: Longman, 1999).
J. L. Dawson, P. D. Holland, and D. J. McKitterick, eds., A Concordance to the Complete Poems and Plays of T. S. Eliot (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1995).
Denis Donaghue, Words Alone: The Poet T. S. Eliot (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000).
Paul Douglass, T. S. Eliot, Dante, and the Idea of Europe (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 201 I).
T. S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays (London: Faber and Faber, 1969).

The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition: Apprentice Years, 1905-1918, ed. Jewel Spears Brooker and Ronald Schuchard (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014). Project MUSE. <http://muse.jhu.edu/>.
The Complete Prose of T. S. Eliot: The Critical Edition: The Perfect Critic, 1919-1926, ed. Anthony Cuda and Ronald Schuchard (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014). Project MUSE. [http://muse.jhu.edu/](http://muse.jhu.edu/).
Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917, ed. Christopher Ricks (London: Faber and Faber, 1996).
The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 1: 1898-1922, revised edition, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton (London: Faber and Faber, 2009).
The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 2: 1923-1925, ed. Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton (London: Faber and Faber, 2009).
The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 3: 1926-1927, ed. Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden (London: Faber and Faber, 2012).
The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 4: 1928-1929, ed. Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden (London: Faber and Faber, 2013).
The Letters of T. S. Eliot, Volume 5: 1930-1931 (London: Faber and Faber, 2014).
Selected Essays (1932; London: Faber and Faber, 1999).
Selected Prose of T. S. Eliot, ed. Frank Kermode (New York: Harvest, 1975).
The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound, ed. Valerie Eliot (New York: Harcourt, 1971).
Maud Ellmann, The Poetics of Impersonality: T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound (Brighton: Harvester, 1987).
Sir James Frazer, The Golden Bough; A History of Myth and Religion (1890; Oxford: Oxford World's Classics, 2009).
Nancy Gish and Cassandra Laity, eds., Gender, Desire, and Sexuality in T. S. Eliot, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Lyndall Gordon, The Imperfect Life of T. S. Eliot, revised edition (New York: Norton, 2015).
Michael Grant, T. S. Eliot: The Critical Heritage (London: Routledge, 1982).

M. A. R. Habib, The Early T. S. Eliot and Western Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
Jason Harding, ed., T. S. Eliot in Context (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
Jason Harding, and Giovanni Cianci, eds., T. S. Eliot and the Concept of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Nancy Duvall Hargrove, T. S. Eliot's Parisian Year (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2009).
Peter Howarth, The Cambridge Introduction to Modernist Poetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
Andreas Huyssen, After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986).
Gregory Jay, T. S. Eliot and the Poetics of Literary History (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1983).
Hugh Kenner, The Invisible Poet (New York: Harcourt, 1969).
ed., T. S. Eliot: A Collection of Critical Essays (1932; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962).
Colleen Lamos, Deviant Modernism: Sexual and Textual Errancy in T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Marcel Proust (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Michael Levenson, Modernism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 201 I).
ed., The Cambridge Companion to Modernism, 2nd edition (1999; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
ed., A Genealogy of Modernism: A Study of English Literary Doctrine, 1908-1922 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
A. Walton Litz, ed., Eliot in His Time: Essays on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of The Waste Land (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973).
Ed Madden, Tiresian Poetics: Modernism, Sexuality, Voice, 1888-200I (Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2008).
F. O. Matthiessen, The Achievement of T. S. Eliot: An Essay on the Nature of Poetry, 3rd edition (1958; New York: Oxford University Press, 1959).
Gabrielle McIntire, Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T. S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
Cleo McNelly Kearns, T. S. Eliot and Indic Traditions: A Study in Poetry and Belief (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
Louis Menand, Discovering Modernism: T. S. Eliot and His Context, 2nd edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
James E. Miller, Jr. T. S. Eliot: The Making of an American Poet, 1888-1922 (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2005).
Joe Moffett, ed., The Waste Land at 90: A Retrospective (New York: Rodopi, 201 I).
A. David Moody, Thomas Stearns Eliot: Poet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
ed., The Cambridge Companion to T. S. Eliot (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Peter Nicholls, Modernisms, 2nd edition (1995; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).

Michael North, The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language, and Twentieth-Century Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).

Reading 1922: A Return to the Scene of the Modern (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
ed., The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition (New York: Norton, 2001).
Marja Palmer, Men and Women in T. S. Eliot's Early Poetry (Lund: Lund University Press, 1996).
Rachel Potter, Modernism and Democracy: Literary Culture, 1900-1930 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
Modernist Literature (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012).
Obscene Modernism: Literary Censorship and Experiment, 1900-1940 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
Jean-Michel Rabaté, 1913: The Cradle of Modernism (Oxford: Blackwell, 2007).
ed., A Handbook of Modernism Studies (Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013).

Craig Raine, T. S. Eliot (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
Lawrence Rainey, Revisiting The Waste Land (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005).
ed., The Annotated Waste Land with Eliot's Contemporary Prose, 2nd edition (2005; New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006).
Gareth Reeves, T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land (New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1994).
John Paul Riquelme, ed., T. S. Eliot (Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 2010).
Ronald Schuchard, Eliot's Dark Angel: Intersections of Life and Art (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
Nick Selby, ed., T. S. Eliot: The Waste Land (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999).
Grover Smith, T. S. Eliot and the Use of Memory (Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press, 1997).
B. C. Southam, A Student's Guide to the Selected Poems of T. S. Eliot (London: Faber and Faber, 1968).
Barry Spurr, Anglo-Catholic in Religion: T. S. Eliot and Christianity (Cambridge: Lutterworth, 2010).
Paul Stasi, Modernism, Imperialism, and the Historical Sense (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
Leon Surette, The Modern Dilemma: Wallace Stevens, T. S. Eliot and Humanism (Montréal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2008).
Michael Tratner, Modernism and Mass Politics: Joyce, Woolf, Eliot, Yeats (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995).
Jessie Weston, From Ritual to Romance (1920; New York: Doubleday, 1957).
Michael H. Whitworth, ed., Modernism (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2007).
Andrea Zemgulys, Modernism and the Locations of Literary Heritage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
